GOOD
EVENING EVERYONE AND WELCOME TO
THE FEBRUARY 10 WORK SESSION
OF THE ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL.
WE'VE GOT A LOT TO DISCUSS
TONIGHT.
>> SO MR. TONY OF THE COUNTRY.
THANK MAYOR.
GOOD EVENING TO ALL OF YOU.
WEEK FOUR TOPICS WE'RE GOING TO
BE COVERING TONIGHT.
FIRST UP WILL BE CITY WIDE
SOLUTIONS.
>> IT'S ACTUALLY A CITY PROJECT
PER SAY, BUT WE'RE HELPING TO
FACILITATE ITS ENTRY INTO ANN
ARBOR.
YOU'LL HEAR ABOUT THE SOFTWARE
THAT WILL ENABLE PEOPLE WHO ARE
LOOKING FOR HOUSING OPTIONS TO
FIND INFORMATION.
SO THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
COUNCIL MEMBER GHAZI EDWYN
FLAGGED FOR US AND WE'VE BEEN
MEETING WITH THE DEVELOPER AND
SO HER PRESENTATION ABOUT THAT
THIS WILL BE YOUR FIRST
PRESENTATION FROM MONICA, OUR
H.R. DIRECTOR TALKING ABOUT
THINGS SHE'S WORKING ON AND
LOOKING FORWARD FOR HOW THE
FUNCTION OF THAT OFFICE WILL BE
UNFOLDING.
BUT THOSE ARE TWO RELATIVELY
SHORT PRESENTATIONS AND THEN
EVEN THOUGH THE PLANNING
PROCESS IS STILL UNDERWAY, YOU
UPDATE FROM THE STAFF ABOUT
SOME OF THE THEMES THAT ARE
EMERGING FROM THAT PROCESS THAT
TAKE A LITTLE BIT LONGER AND
THEN WE'LL END UP WITH A
PRESENTATION ON THE SOLID WASTE
FUNCTION WE'VE NEVER REALLY
TALKED TO YOU ABOUT HOW WE DO
WHAT WE DO, WHAT WE'RE LOOKING
AT, WHAT THE OBSTACLES ARE,
WHAT THE OPPORTUNITIES ARE SO
WILL TAKE ABOUT A HALF AN HOUR
TO PRESENT THAT TO YOU BECAUSE
THE TOPICS ARE SO DIFFERENT WE
WOULD ASK THAT WE DO Q&A AFTER
EACH TOPIC PARTICULARLY FOR OUR
FIRST GENTLEMAN SO HE CAN MOVE
ON TO WHEREVER ELSE HE'S.
SO WITH THAT IT'S MY PLEASURE
TO PRESENT DOMENICK AND SALONE
AND HE WILL TALK TO YOU ABOUT
HIS SOFTWARE.
HELLO, MY NAME IS DOMINIC
ANZALONE CITYWIDE SOFTWARE.
I'M THE FOUNDER CEO I THINK TO
GIVE THE FULL DEFINITION
OF WHAT WE'RE DOING I'LL START
FROM THE VERY BEGINNING WHICH
IS 13 YEARS AGO IN COLLEGE I
STARTED A COMPANY CALLED
COLLEGE PADS AND BASICALLY WHAT
COLLEGE PADS IT IS IT WOULD
PARTNER WITH UNIVERSITIES TO
CREATE A MARKETPLACE FOR
HOUSING OFF CAMPUS BEFORE WE
STARTED THAT COMPANY STUDENTS
WOULD GO ALL OVER THE PLACE TO
FIND HOUSING MOSTLY THEY WOULD
LOOK FOR FOR RENT SIGNS AND IT
WAS JUST VERY TOUGH TO FIND THE
MIDDLE MARKET LANDLORDS, THE
AFFORDABLE LANDLORDS AND
LANDLORDS WITH SCATTERED TYPE
PORTFOLIO LIKE HOUSES AND
SMALLER APARTMENT BUILDINGS AND
SO WE PARTNERED WITH MARQUETTE
UNIVERSITY IN TWENTY THIRTEEN
AND WE BUILT OUT A PLATFORM
WITH THEM IN THAT FIRST YEAR
MORE LANDLORDS USED IT THAN WE
WE THOUGHT WERE OFF CAMPUS AND
MORE STUDENTS USE IT THAN WE
THOUGHT LIVED OFF CAMPUS.
SO WE HAD A REALLY BIG HIT FAST
FORWARD 13 YEARS WE WORK WITH
ALMOST EVERY UNIVERSITY IN THE
COUNTRY.
THERE'S ABOUT FIVE MILLION
STUDENTS A YEAR THAT FIND
HOUSING ON OUR UNIVERSITY
PLATFORMS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
SO WE REALLY CREATED A
SUCCESSFUL WAY FOR STUDENTS TO
FIND HOUSING.
ABOUT A YEAR AGO WE STARTED A
NEW COMPANY CALLED CITYWIDE
SOFTWARE WHERE WE AIM TO DO
THIS WITH CITY GOVERNMENT TO
THE EXACT SAME VALUE
PROPOSITION THAT WE HAD FOR
UNIVERSITIES WE'RE DOING WITH
CITIES NOW AND THE THOUGHT
PROCESS IS THAT THE CITY
BRANDING HAS THE POWER TO BRING
EVERYONE TOGETHER SO WE CAN GET
EVERY LANDLORD IN THE CITY TO
PARTICIPATE.
WE CAN GET EVERY RENTER IN THE
CITY TO PARTICIPATE ON ONE
PLATFORM AND BY USING THE CITY
BRAND WE'LL COME UP FIRST ON
GOOGLE WE'LL BE ABLE TO GET
MOST RENTERS TO FIND THIS RIGHT
AWAY AND THERE'S A LOT OF TOOLS
WE WANT TO PUT IN THERE SO
WE'RE NOT DOING THIS FOR SURE
HERE BUT WE CAN USE THINGS LIKE
CODE ENFORCEMENT DATA ON EVERY
SINGLE LISTING THAT IS ON THE
CITY SITE TO BASICALLY EDUCATE
RENTERS ON WHAT KIND
OF PROPERTY THEY'RE GOING INTO.
SO TODAY IF YOU'RE A RENTER IN
THE CITY OR A MIDDLE INCOME
RENTER IS A BETTER WAY TO
DESCRIBE IT.
YOU HAVE NO IDEA IF A
PROPERTY'S IN BAD STANDING WITH
THE CITY, YOU'RE PROBABLY NOT
GOING TO ABLE TO FIND THE
MARKET GREAT AFFORDABLE UNITS
OF THE CITY JUST BECAUSE IF YOU
GO TO AN APARTMENT DOTCOM AS AN
EXAMPLE, ALL YOU'RE GOING TO
FIND IS THE LUXURY APARTMENTS
ON THOSE SITES BECAUSE IT COST
ABOUT FORTY THOUSAND DOLLARS
PER YEAR
TO ADVERTISE ON THOSE
SITES.
SO IF YOU'RE A SMALLER BUILDING
THAT IS NOT CHARGING AS MUCH
FOR RENT, YOU'RE PROBABLY NOT
GOING TO PAY TO ADVERTISE ON
APARTMENTS DOTCOM.
SO THE WAY WE'RE SOLVING THAT
IS BY HAVING THIS CITY LOGO
SITE CITY SPONSORED SITE BE THE
GO TO SPOT WHERE WE WON'T
CHARGE LANDLORDS LIKE THAT TO
BE ON IT AND WE THINK WE CAN GO
OUT AND GET EVERY SINGLE
LANDLORD IN THE CITY TO
PARTICIPATE ON THIS PLATFORM
AND SO WE THINK WE CAN GIVE
INVENTORY TO THE RENTERS THAT
THEY WOULDN'T TYPICALLY HAVE.
SO WE THINK AT THE END OF THIS
WE'LL BE ABLE TO POINT TO HOW
MANY LOWER INCOME RENTERS WE
HELPED, HOW MANY MIDDLE INCOME
RENTERS WE HELPED AND HOW MANY
RENTERS WENT TO A MORE LUXURY
UNITS IN THE CITY ALSO.
SO I'LL KIND OF SHOW IT TO YOU
BECAUSE I THINK THAT'LL BE
HELPFUL TO SEE.
IT'S A QUICK PULL.
OK, PERFECT.
SO OK, SO THIS IS THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN'S SITE
THAT COLLEGE PAD'S HAS WITH THE
UNIVERSITY.
SO WHEN A STUDENT COMES IN TO
GET IT YOU'LL SEE THIS
DISCLAIMER ON THE SITE.
SO WE WANT TO MAKE IT REALLY
CLEAR THAT WE'RE NOT ENDORSING
OR PROMOTING ANY PROPERTY IN
THE UNIVERSITY AREA AND THEY
WOULD COME IN AND THEY WOULD
SEE ALL OF THE COLLEGE OPTIONS
IN THE MARKET AND WE'RE LISTING
THE HOUSING FAIR HERE.
>> SO WE DO STUFF LIKE THAT AND
THEN THEY COULD SCROLL THROUGH
ALL OF THE LISTINGS IN THE
CAMPUS AREA AND THEY WOULD
SEARCH THROUGH THE PICTURES,
THE AMENITIES AND THEN THIS IS
WHERE THEY WOULD CONTACT THE
PROPERTY GROUP ALSO.
SO WHAT WE'RE DOING TODAY THIS
IS KENOSHA, WISCONSIN AND WE
STARTED WITH WISCONSIN BECAUSE
WE'RE BASED IN MILWAUKEE,
WISCONSIN.
AND SO HERE YOU CAN SEE HOW
WE'RE USING THE CITY.
CROATIA'S LOGO
.
I GO OH GOD.
PERFECT.
COOL.
ALL RIGHT.
SO A VERY SIMILAR DISCLAIMER
WILL POP UP TO RENTERS NOW THAT
WE'RE NOT PROMOTING OR
ENDORSING ANY PROPERTY ON THE
SITE.
WE'LL USE THE CITY OF KENOSHA
LOGO LIKE WE ARE ON THIS
PLATFORM.
IT'S THE CITY DOMAIN SO IT'S
APARTMENTS ACROSS YOUR DOG AND
WE WENT OUT AND GOT EVERY
APARTMENT IN THE CITY THAT WE
COULD FIND TO PARTICIPATE IN
THIS PLATFORM.
SO WHAT YOU CAN SEE IS THAT WE
HAVE THE CODE ENFORCEMENT
BUTTON THERE SO YOU CAN SEE
CODE ENFORCEMENT FOR EVERY
PROPERTY WE BUILT OUT AN ENTIRE
AFFORDABILITY SECTION OF THE
SITE SO THERE'S GOVERNMENT
SUBSIDIZED, AFFORDABLE AND THEN
THERE'S MARKET GREAT AFFORDABLE
FOR THE GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIZED
AFFORDABLE.
YOU CLICK A FILTER AND IT
BASICALLY TAKES YOU TO A NEW
SITE WHERE YOU CAN SEARCH BY
WHAT SUBSIDY YOU'RE LOOKING
FOR.
SO WHETHER IT'S A SECTION EIGHT
OR EVERY CITY HAS DIFFERENT
STANDARDS BUT YOU CAN KIND SEE
HOW KENOSHA BREAKS IT DOWN.
I THINK YOU GO BACK TO MARKET
RATE HOUSING AND SO WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO IS COMBINED WHAT
TRADITIONAL AFFORDABLE IS WITH
MARKET RATE AFFORDABLE A LOT
OF TIMES AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS
A HUGE WAITLIST AND WE THINK A
LOT OF THOSE RENTERS DON'T KNOW
THAT THERE'S A NATURALLY
OCCURRING AFFORDABLE HOUSING
AND MOSTLY BECAUSE IT'S REALLY
HARD TO FIND IF YOU GO INTO AN
APARTMENT.
SACKHEIM, YOU'RE JUST NOT GOING
TO SEE IT IF YOU GO TO FACEBOOK
MARKETPLACE YOU'RE NOT GOING TO
SEE IT SO YOU'RE JUST NOT GOING
TO FIND IT UNLESS YOU'RE REALLY
DRIVING AROUND LOOKING FOR FOR
RENT SIGNS EVERYWHERE.
AND THAT'S THE ISSUE WE'RE
TRYING TO SOLVE HERE.
AND SO WE'VE DONE SEVEN
PARTNERSHIPS SO FAR WITH CITIES
IN THE LAST SIX MONTHS A LOT IN
WISCONSIN AND NOW WE'RE KIND
OF BRIDGING OUT AND BASICALLY
WE USE THE SAME CONTRACT THAT
WE USE WITH THE OTHER CITIES
THAT THEIR CITY ATTORNEY'S
REALLY VETTED A LOT AND WE
WORKED WITH AT LEAST TO VET IT
HERE THERE'S AN OUT FOR THE
CITY AT ANY TIME SO WE WANT TO
MAKE IT SO IT'S AS RISK FREE AS
POSSIBLE FOR THE CITY WE HOLD
THE CITY HARMLESS FROM ALMOST
ANYTHING.
WE HAVE ALL THE INSURANCES
WOULD NEED THAT'S KIND OF IT.
I GUESS I'LL OPEN IT UP TO
QUESTIONS AND WE CAN DOVE IN.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS FROM
COUNCIL MEMBERS COUNCILMAN
MALIK, THANK YOU FOR THIS
PRESENTATION.
I WHEN I'VE BEEN IN THE MARKET
PREVIOUSLY FOR AN APARTMENT
I'VE DEFINITELY WISHED
SOMETHING LIKE THIS HAD EXISTED
AT THE TIME.
ONE THING I'VE HEARD THOUGH
ABOUT KIND OF THE DECENTRALIZED
MODEL IS IT CAN REALLY GUARD
AGAINST LANDLORDS FROM
COLLUDING ON PRICE BECAUSE YOU
KNOW, IF YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT
EVERYONE ELSE IS CHARGING, YOU
CAN'T KIND OF BID UP IF YOU
WILL.
I GUESS HOW WOULD YOU ARGUE
AGAINST SOMETHING LIKE THAT
WITH AN AGGREGATOR WEBSITE LIKE
THIS?
>> YEAH, I THINK MOST LANDLORDS
STILL FIND A WAY TO KNOW WHAT
OTHER LANDLORDS ARE CHARGING.
THEY CARE ABOUT PROFIT A LOT SO
THEY'LL GO OUT AND HUNT THAT
DOWN.
I THINK OBVIOUSLY A TOUGH THING
TO SOLVE FOR FOR SURE BUT WHAT
WE'RE TRYING TO DO THE FLIP
SIDE OF THAT IS WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO IS GIVE MORE
OPTIONS TO THE RENT THERE.
SO I THINK RIGHT NOW FOR RENT
DURLEY HAS FIFTY OPTIONS WHEN
THEY'RE SEARCHING OR LET'S SAY
EVEN TEN OPTIONS WHEN THEY'RE
SEARCHING, WE'RE GOING TO OPEN
IT UP TO TWO HUNDRED OPTIONS
AND SO YOU'RE CERTAINLY GOING
TO FIND A BETTER PRICE POINT, A
BETTER LANDLORD, A BETTER
LOCATION, ALL THAT STUFF.
SO INFORMATION IS KEY.
I THINK RIGHT NOW IF YOU TALK
TO A RENTER LOOKING FOR THAT
MIDDLE INCOME TIER, I THINK
THEY WOULD TELL YOU THAT THEY
DON'T KNOW ABOUT ALMOST ANY
OPTIONS THAT ARE OUT THERE AND
SO WE'RE GOING TO REALLY OPEN
THEIR HORIZONS A LOT ON THAT
CAMERA DENHA THANK YOU AND
THANK YOU TO MY COLLEAGUE
COUNCIL MEMBER EDMOND FOR
READING THIS CONVERSATION.
BUT I GUESS MY FIRST QUESTION
IS SIMILAR.
YOU KNOW, I THINK WE'VE
ACTUALLY SEEN SOME EXAMPLES
OF WHERE LANDLORDS ARE ACTUALLY
ALREADY STARTING TO KIND
OF COLLUDE WITH ONE ANOTHER ON
PRICING USING SOFTWARE THAT
HELPS THEM SET PRICING AND
THINGS LIKE THAT.
HAVE YOU NOTICED ANY TRENDS OR
MAYBE IT'S TOO SOON TO NOTICE
THESE TRENDS WHERE WHEN IT'S
EASIER FOR FOLKS TO BE ABLE TO
FIND MAYBE THOSE HIDDEN MORE
AFFORDABLE UNITS?
ARE YOU SEEING TRENDS WHERE
ACTUALLY SOME OF THE APARTMENTS
THAT ARE LISTED ARE REDUCING
THEIR PRICES OVER TIME TO BE
MORE COMPETITIVE?
>> IT'S REALLY TOUGH TO SEE
THAT DATA HAPPENED.
I THINK YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
LIKE YARDIE AND WHAT THEY WERE
DOING IS THAT THERE ARE A
NUMBER OF SOFTWARES WHERE THEY
CAN SEE REAL TIME WHERE WHAT
THE MARKET IS THE AND WHAT
THEY'RE DOING IT WITH A LOT
OF THE BIG APARTMENT BUILDINGS
THAT ARE OUT THERE AND
TYPICALLY YOU SEE THAT WITH THE
MEGA COMPLEXES ESPECIALLY IN
HOUSING AND IT'S REALLY HARD
FOR THE SMALLER BUILDINGS TO
PARTICIPATE IN SOMETHING LIKE
THAT BECAUSE THEIR PRODUCT IS
SO UNIQUE.
SO THEY TYPICALLY WOULDN'T DO
THAT AND SO THERE'S NOT REALLY
A WAY TO SOLVE THAT I THINK
EXCEPT FOR GIVING THE RENTER
THE SAME POWER THAT THE
LANDLORD HAS AND THAT, YOU
KNOW, RENTERS SHOULD BE ABLE TO
SEE EVERY PRICE POINT IN THE
CITY THEN.
BUT YEAH, FOR SURE THE MEGA
COMPLEXES AROUND THE COUNTRY
HAVE FOUND A WAY TO DO THAT
BASICALLY THEY'RE ALL SHARING
DATA.
WE KNOW ALL THE COLLEGE
LANDLORDS FROM WORKING WITH
THEM.
THEY ALL SHARE DATA TO KNOW
WHERE TO BE ON PRICE BASICALLY
.
AND THEN THIS IS MORE OF A
QUESTION FOR KIND OF YOUR
BUSINESS MODEL IN TERMS OF YOU
KNOW, YOU MENTIONED THAT WE CAN
GET EVERY LANDLORD IN THE CITY
ON THIS WHO'S ACTUALLY KIND
OF DOING THAT RECRUITMENT TO
GET FOLKS TO TO LIST ON THE
SITE AND THEN WHAT IS YOU KNOW,
AS YOU CONTINUE TO GROW AS A
BUSINESS AS YOUR YOU KNOW, IT
SOUNDS LIKE YOU'VE GOT THIS
MODEL FOR COLLEGES BUT AS YOU
CONTINUE TO GROW ANOTHER CITY
MODEL, WHAT'S YOUR MODEL FOR
SUSTAINABILITY LONG TERM AS YOU
KNOW MORE APARTMENTS COME
ONLINE.
ARE YOU REACHING OUT TO THEM OR
IS THAT RESPONSIBILITY ON THE
CITY WHO MAINTAINS THE SITE
LONG TERM?
IT'S A VERY GOOD QUESTION.
SO THERE WE HAVE A FULL TIME IN
THE CITY WHO WOULD DO NOTHING
BUT THE CITY SITE AND THEIR
WHOLE JOB WOULD BE TO FORM
RELATIONSHIPS WITH THE
LANDLORD.
SO THE HARDEST PART OF THIS
BUSINESS IS NOT THE SOFTWARE
SIDE, IT IS THE LANDLORD SIDE
AND SO REALLY THE VALUE THAT
WE'RE BRINGING TO THE RENTER IS
THAT WE'RE GOING TO HAVE EVERY
PROPERTY FOR THEM AND THEN THE
DATA ON THAT'S GOING TO BE UP
TO DATE AT ALL TIMES.
AND SO TO DO THAT WE HAVE TO
HAVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH THEM
WHERE WE'RE EITHER UPDATING
THEIR PROPERTY INFORMATION OR
THEIR PROPERTY MANAGER SOFTWARE
FEEDS US THEIR DATA SO WHEN
THEY CHANGE A PRICE THEIR OWN
WEBSITE IT CHANGES THE CITY
WEBSITE.
BUT YEAH, IT'S A BIG JOB TO DO
THAT FOR SURE AND IT TAKES
ABOUT A YEAR TO GET EVERY
SINGLE MEETING BUT ARE PROMISES
THAT WILL MEET WITH EVERY
LANDLORD, WHETHER THEY'RE MOM
AND POP DUPLEX LANDLORD OR
THEY'RE A SUPER COMPLEX
BASICALLY.
AND IF YOU SAW THE COLLEGE SITE
THAT MY OLD COMPANY COLLEGE
PAD'S HAS WE DID THAT ALREADY
IN TOWN WHERE EVERY SINGLE
LANDLORD ON THIS PAGE WE HAVE A
RELATIONSHIP WITH AND YOU CAN
SEE ALL THE HOUSE INVENTORY AND
SO REALLY WITH LIKE THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN, THE
GOAL THAT WE HAD WITH THEM WAS
TO GO GET INVENTORY THAT NOBODY
ELSE HAD THAT COMPARTMENT STOCK
BECAUSE IF AGAIN YOU GO TO
APARTMENTS IT'S JUST THE
APARTMENT BUILDINGS.
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO FIND ANY
HOUSES ON AIR OR FIVE UNIT
APARTMENT BUILDINGS ON THEIR SO
IT'LL BE AN ONGOING THING
FOREVER THOUGH WHERE THEY'LL BE
HERE MEETING WITH PEOPLE LIKE
SEATTLE.
THANK YOU DOMINICK AND THANKS
FOR COMING OUT HERE AND SHARING
THIS WITH ALL OF US.
SO JUST GIVE US SOME CONTEXT.
SO I WHEN I WORKED AT DETROIT
DISABILITY POWER AS AN
ORGANIZATION WE HELPED DETROIT
CITY COUNCIL.
WELL, THE GOVERNMENT TO DEVELOP
A SITE CALLED DETROIT HOME
CONNECT AND DETROIT HOME
CONNECT ALSO ALLOWS RENTERS TO
USE FIELDS LIKE ACCESSIBILITY
IT HAVE A RAMP DOES IT HAVE AN
ACCESSIBLE KITCHEN AND IT
REALLY HELPED TO IMPROVE
PLACEMENT FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE
HOUSING INSECURE WHO OFTEN WILL
BE ON A WAIT LIST AND THEN
THEY'LL
GET SOMEWHERE AND IT'S
NOT ACCESSIBLE.
>> SO I WAS PUT IN CONTACT WITH
YOU ACTUALLY THROUGH THE MAYOR
AND I WANTED JUST TO CLARIFY SO
SOME OF THE FIELDS THAT YOU
COULD ADD COULD BE FOR EXAMPLE,
ACCESSIBILITY BIG TIME.
AND SO RIGHT NOW THERE ARE
ALREADY THERE ARE FILTERS FOR
FOR EXAMPLE YOU'LL SEE SENIOR
LIVING ON HERE AND WE'LL DO
LIKE SENIOR SENIOR LIVING
ACCESSIBLE HOUSING TO A LOT
OF THOSE THINGS WILL GO OUT AND
WE'LL TRY TO FIND THOSE
APARTMENT BUILDINGS THAT ARE
FRIENDLY FOR THOSE FEATURES
THAT MAKE SENSE.
>> YEAH.
YEAH.
THANK YOU.
AND WHAT THEY FOUND IN DETROIT
IS THAT PROVIDING THESE
ADDITIONAL FEATURES AS WELL AS
YOU KNOW HOUSING BY INCOME SIZE
HAS HELPED WITH REDUCING AS I
SAID, HOUSING INSECURITY.
I HAVE ANOTHER QUESTION IS IT
POSSIBLE TO I'M SURE THAT THE
RENTERS COMMISSION WILL HAVE
SOME INVOLVEMENT IN THIS BUT
FOR EXAMPLE, LINKING TENANTS
RIGHTS RESOURCES ON THE WEBSITE
HOW TO FILE A COMPLAINT AGAINST
THE HOUSING PROVIDERS?
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT'S A
POSSIBILITY.
YEAH.
SO A BIG PART OF OUR COLLEGE
SITES THAT WE HAD IS THAT WE
WOULD HAVE BETTER EDUCATION AND
SO WE WOULD GO OUT AND WE'D
ACTUALLY USE LIKE STUDENT LEGAL
SERVICES TO DO VIDEOS AND PUT
OTHER CONTENT OUT THERE TO
TEACH STUDENTS HOW TO SIGN A
LEASE OR WHAT TO WATCH OUT FOR.
WE WANT TO DO THE SAME THING AT
THE CITY LEVEL.
A LOT OF THOSE CITY RESOURCES
ALREADY EXIST.
SO LIKE IN KENOSHA WE LINK TO
THEIR CITY RESOURCES OR WE HAVE
A YOUR EDUCATION AND THEN SO WE
JUST KIND OF LIST OUT ALL
OF THE RESOURCES THE CITY HAS
ALREADY PUT TOGETHER IN KIND
OF A FRIENDLY WAY.
AND AGAIN HERE WE'RE TRYING TO
PUT VIDEOCON OUT TO BASICALLY
DOVE INTO THE MAIN THINGS THAT
PEOPLE SHOULD WATCH OUT FOR AND
WE'RE DEVELOPING OTHER TOOLS
LIKE LEASE REVIEW WITH ANOTHER
CITY NOW WHERE WE'RE GOING TO
USE EHI TO REVIEW PEOPLE'S SAYS
A LOT OF CITIES DON'T LIKE THAT
IDEA BUT SOME DO.
>> SO YEAH, IT'S A LITTLE MORE
AGGRESSIVE I GUESS I HAVE ONE
MORE QUESTION.
>> YOU MENTIONED THE ABILITY TO
GENERATE REPORTS SO COULD FOR
EXAMPLE A REPORT INCLUDE THINGS
LIKE IF IF IT DETECTS SOME SORT
OF TRENDS IN PRICE GOUGING FOR
EXAMPLE OF DIFFERENT BETWEEN
DIFFERENT DEVELOPERS OR
LANDLORDS?
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT COULD BE
INCLUDED IN A REPORT?
>> SO YES, WE CAN GIVE YOU ALL
THE DATA YOU WANT INCLUDING
WHERE PRICE POINTS ARE IN THE
MARKET, SOMETHING OTHER CITIES
ARE DOING OR THEY'RE PUTTING UP
WHEN A LANDLORD IS CHARGING
HIGH APPLICATION FEES SO THINGS
LIKE THAT WHERE THEY'RE TRYING
TO GOUGE ON THE THINGS THAT YOU
WOULDN'T REALLY KNOW TYPICALLY
.
YEAH.
SO WE CAN KIND OF TRY TO PUT
THAT DATA TOGETHER HOWEVER YOU
WANT IT BASICALLY.
BUT THE CITY WILL ALWAYS HAVE A
DASHBOARD WHERE THEY CAN LOG IN
AND SEE THE HIGH LEVEL DATA.
SO WE ARE RENTERS GOING TO THE
CITY.
WHAT PRICE POINTS ARE THEY
GOING TO HOW ARE THEY GOING TO
THE WHAT TYPE OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING ARE THEY GOING TO?
AND SO YOU'LL BE ABLE TO PULL
OUT ANY TIME AND THEN AT
REQUEST WE CAN REALLY DIG INTO
THE DATA DEEPER.
YEAH.
AND A MAJORITY RUN OUR CITY.
I FEEL LIKE THAT WOULD BE
REALLY HELPFUL DATA TO HAVE
PICKED UP.
>> SO THANK YOU.
YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
KATARA BRIGG'S PERHAPS IS THE
LAST ONE SO WE CAN MOVE ON TO
THE NEXT BECAUSE BECAUSE YOU
PLAYED SOUNDS GOOD.
THE TWO QUESTIONS ONE IS WOULD
WOULD YOU ANTICIPATE THAT
COLLEGE PAD WOULD CONTINUE TO
EXIST?
YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
SO IT HAS PARTNERSHIP WITH THE
UNIVERSITY AND THEY'LL CONTINUE
TO EXIST.
REALLY WHAT WE'RE AFTER IS
AFTER COLLEGE HOUSING.
SO YOU KNOW ANYONE THAT'S
OUTSIDE OF A COLLEGE AGE
STUDENT WE WANT TO KIND OF HAVE
THEM USE THIS FOR OUR RENTAL
POPULATION THAT I MEAN WE WOULD
DO DO WITH FOLKS WHO ARE YOU
KNOW, IN THE COLLEGE ATTENDING
COLLEGE AND ALSO NON RENTER IN
A NON UNIVERSITY AFFILIATED.
SO I CAN IMAGINE THIS SITE
CATERING VERY MUCH THE SAME
POPULATION THERE BEING SOME
TYPE OF CONFUSION AROUND WHAT
THOSE TWO RESOURCES LOOK LIKE.
IS THERE A REASON THAT THESE
MIGHT NOT BE ABLE TO BE MERGED
AND IN A COMMUNITY LIKE OURS
WHERE WE HAVE BOTH POPULATIONS
SO I THINK THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN JUST DOES A REALLY
GOOD JOB FOR STUDENTS IN
PARTICULAR AND THERE'S THINGS
LIKE THEY USE THEIR STUDENT LOG
IN TO GET INTO THE ROOMMATE AND
SUBLEASED PAGE.
IT IS A VERY DIFFERENT
EXPERIENCE THAN IF YOU'RE A NON
STUDENT RENTER.
FOR EXAMPLE, STUDENTS FIND
HOUSING SIX MONTHS TO NINE
MONTHS IN ADVANCE.
SO IF YOUR FACULTY AND STAFF OR
JUST A STUDENT IN THE CITY
FINDING HOUSING IS VERY
DIFFERENT.
AND SO IF YOU GO TO THAT SITE
IT'S GOING TO BE VERY HARD TO
USE THAT IF NOT IMPOSSIBLE TO
USE IT.
SO I KNOW THAT'S A HUGE PART
OF THE POPULATION HERE BUT WHAT
WE'RE AFTER IS AFTER COLLEGE
FOR SURE AND THEN IN TERMS
OF APPRECIATE THE QUESTION
AROUND ACCESSIBILITY, ANOTHER
PIECE THAT WE'RE TRYING TO
BENCHMARK AROUND EVENTUALLY IS
GREEN RENTAL HOUSING AND YOU
KNOW HOW THAT IS ARE THOSE
DISCUSSIONS THAT YOU'VE HAD AT
ALL YET WITH STAFF AROUND HOW
WE MIGHT INTEGRATE THAT DATA
AND YEAH, SO JUST A TINY BIT
AND SO THINGS THAT WE COULD DO
AS A HIGH LEVEL IDEA IS THAT WE
COULD PUT BADGES ON THOSE
PROPERTIES THAT MEET THOSE
STANDARDS OR WE COULD PROMOTE
THAT ANYWHERE YOU WANT TO
CREATE AN INCENTIVE FOR
LANDLORDS TO DO IT.
SO WE THINK OVER 90 PERCENT
OF RENTERS WILL COME THROUGH
THIS PLATFORM IN THE CITY AFTER
COLLEGE AND SO WE THINK IT
GIVES A LOT OF POWER TO PUSH
THINGS LIKE THAT FORWARD TO TRY
TO CREATE AN INCENTIVE FOR
LANDLORDS TO DO THAT.
THANKS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR COMING
OUT AND TALKING TO US AND
REACHING OUT TO THE CITY WITH
THE WITH THE PRODUCT.
IT LOOKS LIKE THERE WILL BE A
GREAT OPPORTUNITY FOR PEOPLE
WHO RENT IN THE CITY TO FIND TO
FIND HOMES.
>> I THINK SO FOR SURE.
IT'S A THANK YOU SO MUCH.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
>> I APPRECIATE IT.
YEAH,
MAJOR, GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU FOR ALLOWING ME A FEW
MINUTES THIS EVENING ON BEHALF
OF THE ENTIRE TEAM TO UPDATE
YOU ON SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
WE'VE BEEN DOING OVER THE LAST
SIX TO SEVEN MONTHS SINCE I WAS
ABLE TO COME ON BOARD.
IT'S BEEN A GREAT EXPERIENCE.
THE CITY HAS BEEN VERY
WELCOMING AND I THINK THE
EXPERIENCE THAT I'VE HAD IS
SOMETHING I WANT TO CONTINUE TO
HAVE THE TEAM REALLY EXPAND AND
MAKE SURE IT'S A CONSISTENT
EXPERIENCE FOR NEW NEW
EMPLOYEES THAT ARE COMING IN.
SO THIS EVENING I WANTED TO
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
RECOGNITION OF THE TEAM.
WHAT OUR RECENT FOCUS HAS BEEN,
SOME OF THE FOUNDATION AND KEY
VALUES THAT WE SEE GOING
FORWARD.
LOOKING FORWARD TO TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AND WHAT WE HAVE
PLANNED THIS YEAR AND THEN INTO
TWENTY TWENTY SIX AND BEYOND
SOME THE TRENDY CHALLENGES FROM
AN H.R. PERSPECTIVE SPECIFIC TO
PUBLIC SECTOR AND THEN OUR
COMMITMENT TO THE FUTURE HERE
YOU'LL SEE THE CURRENT
ORGANIZATIONAL CHART FOR H.R.
AND I THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT THE
MAJORITY OF THE EMPLOYEES IN
OUR TEAM HAVE HAD A BIT OF A
TRANSITION.
WE'LL SAY THAT OVER THE LAST
FEW YEARS AND I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT THEY'VE
REALLY HELD STEADY.
THEY ARE VERY WELL
KNOWLEDGEABLE IN THEIR SUBJECT
MATTER AND THEY ARE VERY
COMMITTED TO MAKING SURE THAT
THE EMPLOYEES AND CANDIDATES
FOR DIFFERENT POSITIONS HERE
ARE REALLY SUPPORTED IN WE'RE
LOOKING AT BOTH THE EMPLOYEE
AND THE CANDIDATE EXPERIENCE.
WE HAVE A NUMBER OF PEOPLE ON
THE TEAM THAT ARE RELATIVELY
NEW, INCLUDING MYSELF.
WE HAVE A NEW MANAGEMENT
ASSISTANT AND A RECENTLY FILLED
ROLE OF THE DEPUTY HUMAN
RESOURCES DIRECTOR WHICH IS A
NEW ROLE THAT ADMINISTRATOR
TONY HAD ENCOURAGED SOME
THOUGHT AND I THINK IT'S A
REALLY IMPORTANT ROLE
PARTICULARLY AS WE MOVE FORWARD
OVER THE NEXT COUPLE OF YEARS
IN TERMS OF TRYING TO MAKE SURE
OPERATIONALLY WITHIN THE
DEPARTMENT WE'RE MEETING OUR
EMPLOYEES NEEDS OF THE TEAM
MEMBERS BUT THEN ALSO ALLOWING
SOME CONNECTION WITH THE
ORGANIZATION AND GETTING INTO
THE ORGANIZATION.
WE HAVE A FEW MEMBERS THAT HAVE
BEEN HERE THROUGH SOME
DIFFICULT TRANSITIONS.
SO EVELIN HEATHER, CHELSEA, KIM
AND KIM HAVE BEEN HERE FOR
QUITE SOME TIME AND WE HAVE
SOME NEWER MEMBERS AND I THINK
THAT YOU'LL SEE WHEN YOU LOOK
AT THE WAY THAT WE ARE
CURRENTLY STRUCTURED, WE HAVE
SOME TENURED EMPLOYEES IN THE
PROGRAM AREA AND HAS NEW
EMPLOYEES SO THAT INSTITUTIONAL
KNOWLEDGE IS REALLY IMPORTANT
AND THEN SOME OF THE NEW IDEAS
FROM EMPLOYEES THAT ARE NEW TO
THE ORGANIZATION AND NEW TO
H.R. HAVE HAD THE ABILITY TO
CONTRIBUTE.
SO OVER THE PRIOR SIX OR SEVEN
MONTHS WE REALLY LOOKED
STRONGLY AT THE CURRENT
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE WITH
HIM LOOKING AT HOW WE SERVICE
THE ORGANIZATION AND THE
SERVICES THAT WE PROVIDE BUT
LOOKING AT THAT STRUCTURE
UNDERSTAND THAT THAT'S WHAT'S
BEEN USED FOR QUITE SOME TIME.
IT APPEARS AND WHETHER OR NOT
WE NEED TO TWEAK THAT GOING
FORWARD WE DID JUST LIKE I SAID
RECENTLY CHANGE TO A MANAGEMENT
ASSISTANT ROLE FROM OUR OFFICE
MANAGER ROLE.
WE HAVE THE DEPUTY AND WE STILL
HAVE A CURRENT VACANCY.
>> WE'RE LOOKING AT WHAT'S THE
BEST WAY TO UTILIZE THAT
PARTICULAR POSITION AND HOW WE
ORGANIZE WITHIN WE'VE DONE A
LOT IN TERMS OF JUST LEARNING
NEW STYLES.
THERE'S ABOUT HALF THE TEAM IS
NEW.
HALF THE TEAM HAS SOME TENURE
AND SO JUST TRYING TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE'RE DEVELOPING
RELATIONSHIPS IN A HYBRID WORK
ENVIRONMENT WHICH CAN BE
CHALLENGING AND THEN REALLY
STARTING TO DO SOME KNOWLEDGE
SHARING EARLIER I MENTIONED
THAT THERE'S A LOT
OF INSTITUTIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND
SUBJECT MATTER KNOWLEDGE IN
THOSE KEY PROGRAM AREAS.
WHAT WE'RE FINDING IS THAT THAT
WE NEED TO CROSS OVER AND
CREATE LESS SILOS WITHIN EACH
IN ORDER TO BE ABLE TO SUPPORT
THE ORGANIZATION MORE
HOLISTICALLY.
SO THE PRIMARY FOCUS OVER THE
LAST SIX MONTHS HAS BEEN VERY
MUCH INTERNAL TO H.R. IN TERMS
OF CREATING THAT TEAM, GETTING
SOME COMFORT , CREATING
COMMUNICATION AND TEAM DYNAMICS
A LITTLE LESS IN TERMS THE
ORGANIZATION EXTERNALLY.
SO THAT'S OUR GOING TO BE OUR
FOCUS OVER THE NEXT SIX MONTHS.
BUT IN ADDITION TO REALLY
FOCUSING INTERNALLY, THERE WERE
A FEW KEY AREAS THAT H.R. HAD
SIGNIFICANT INVOLVEMENT IN AND
SO WE RECENTLY NEGOTIATED TWO
CONTRACTS.
YOU'VE SEEN BOTH OF THOSE
AGREEMENTS COME BEFORE YOU WE
HAVE A COUPLE MORE PENDING ONE
INCLUDING A BRAND NEW CONTRACT
WITH THE DISTRICT COURT
EMPLOYEE.
SO THAT'S A NEW INITIATIVE THAT
REALLY HASN'T OCCURRED IN THE
ORGANIZATION FOR PROBABLY
DECADES FROM A RECRUITMENT
STANDPOINT WE RECRUITED WITHIN
H.R. BUT WE'VE ALSO SUPPORTED
THE ORGANIZATION AND A KEY
NUMBER OF HIRES INCLUDING THOSE
THAT REPORT TO THE
ADMINISTRATOR AND THEN OPEN
ENROLLMENT WHICH IS JUST A
NORMAL OPERATIONAL ACTIVITY
THAT REQUIRES A TON
OF RESOURCES THAT GENERALLY THE
ORGANIZATION DOESN'T
NECESSARILY SEE.
WE HANDLED THAT IN THE LAST SIX
MONTHS AS WELL AND I WILL SAY
BASED ON CLOSE TO 30 YEARS
OF OUR EXPERIENCE, IT WAS ONE
OF THE MOST EFFICIENT, WELL-RUN
OPEN ENROLLMENT THAT I'VE SEEN
IN TERMS OF MAKING SURE THAT
THERE ARE RESOURCES AVAILABLE
AND THE ABILITY TO ANSWER
EMPLOYEE QUESTIONS.
AND THEN THE OTHER PIECE THAT
WE'VE BEEN SIGNIFICANTLY
WORKING ON IS THE COMPENSATION
STUDY.
SO WE HAD SOME INITIAL WORK IN
THE THIRD QUARTER.
WE HAD TO TAKE A PAUSE AND WE
WERE GETTING READY TO
REENERGIZE AND REORGANIZE THAT
PARTICULAR STUDY AND KICKING
OFF SOME EMPLOYEE.
OUR MANAGER SUPERVISOR
ENGAGEMENT HERE IN THE NEXT
MONTH.
SO THAT'S REALLY WHAT THE LAST
SIX MONTHS HAS BEEN FOCUSED ON
GOING FORWARD WE'RE REALLY
ENCOURAGED AND WE WANT TO FOCUS
A LOT ON EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT.
I THINK IN THE FALL WHEN I WAS
HERE JUST TO INTRODUCE MYSELF
FOR THE FIRST TIME I TALKED
ABOUT THAT BEING A SIGNIFICANT
AREA OF INTEREST FOR ME AND
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT BEING
SOMETHING MORE AND EMPLOYEE
SATISFACTION IF AN EMPLOYEE IS
ENGAGED IN THEIR ENGAGE WITH
THEIR COLLEAGUES, THEY'RE
ENGAGED WITH THE COMMUNITY AND
IT'S MORE THAN JUST BEING I'M
SATISFIED THAT I HAVE A JOB.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
ALIGNING WITH THE
ORGANIZATIONAL GOALS AND
COUNCIL'S AS WELL.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE OUR
EMPLOYEES ARE SUPPORTED THAT
WE'RE LOOKING CONTINUOUS
IMPROVEMENT.
WE'RE REALLY LOOKING AT BASING
OUR DECISIONS ON DATA AND
FOCUSING SOME MORE ON TRAINING
AND DEVELOPMENT AND THE WAY IN
WHICH WE WANT TO GO ABOUT THAT
IS VERY MUCH FROM AN EMPATHY
PERSPECTIVE AND MAKING SURE
THAT WE'RE MEETING EMPLOYEES
AND CANDIDATES WHERE THEY ARE
AND TRYING TO DO THAT IN A WAY
THAT ALSO SUPPORTS EQUITY AND
INCLUSION AS A VERY KEY VALUE.
AND I'LL SAY THAT OUR TEAM HAS
BEEN WORKING WITH LAURA ORTA IN
THE ORGANIZATIONAL EQUITY TEAM
AND TRYING TO LOOK AT SOME
OF THE INITIATIVES THAT COUNCIL
HAS PASSED IN THE PAST OR HAS
PASSED IN THE PAST AND SEEN
WHAT WE CAN DO TO MOVE THOSE
FORWARD AND MAKE SURE THAT
THAT'S A FOCUS OF EVERYTHING
THAT WE DO.
AND THEN WE ALSO WANT TO BE
TRANSPARENT WHEN WE COMMUNICATE
AND BE AS HONEST AND OPEN AND
GENUINE AS WE POSSIBLY CAN AND
OF COURSE WE WANT TO BE LEGALLY
COMPLIANT OR HEARTLINE WANTS US
TO.
>> SO USING THOSE FOUNDATIONS
AND THE VALUES GOING FORWARD,
WHAT WE EXPECT OVER THE NEXT
THIS YEAR IS REALLY FOCUSING ON
SOME PROCESS IMPROVEMENT AND
MAKING SURE THAT WE'RE USING
THE RESOURCES WITHIN H.R. AS
EFFICIENTLY AS WE CAN SO THAT
WE CAN EXPAND SOME OF THE
PROGRAM AREAS WHILE DOING
PROCESS IMPROVEMENT.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
ALIGNED WITH SERVICE AREAS AND
SO WE WILL START TO GET OUT
INTO THE ORGANIZATION HERE IN
THE NEXT COUPLE OF MONTHS TO
REALLY START TO LEARN ALL
OF THE OPERATIONAL NEEDS AND
MAKING SURE THAT WE CAN ADJUST
OPERATIONS OR OUR GUIDELINES OR
OUR SUPPORT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THERE'S CONSISTENCY ACROSS THE
ORGANIZATION BUT STILL VALUE
THAT EACH SERVICE AREA HAS
DIFFERENT NEEDS AND THERE'S NOT
ONE MODEL THAT'S GOING TO FIT
EVERY EVERY SERVICE AREA.
BUT WE WANT TO BE CONSISTENT
WHERE WE CAN THROUGH CROSS
TRAINING.
WE WANT TO DEVELOP THAT FURTHER
AND THEN THE SPECIFIC PROJECTS
IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AGAIN I
JUST MENTIONED THAT WE'RE GOING
TO KICK OFF THE RE-ENGAGEMENT
THE COMPENSATION STUDY WE HAVE
ASKED ME NEGOTIATOR THIS YEAR
THAT CONTRACT ENDS AT THE END
OF THE YEAR.
IT'S ONE OF OUR LARGEST GROUPS
AND THAT IS ORGANIZATION WIDE
SO SOME OF THE CONTRACTS THAT
YOU'VE SEEN RECENTLY HAVE BEEN
VERY DEPARTMENT SPECIFIC.
THIS WILL BE AN AGREEMENT THAT
WE LOOK HOLISTICALLY ACROSS THE
ORGANIZATION AND HAVE MEET
MULTIPLE NEEDS AND IN TERMS
OF MOVING A CONTRACT FORWARD
FROM THAT GROUP, RECRUITMENT
AND RETENTION CONTINUES TO BE A
FOCUS.
WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO REDUCE THE
NUMBER OF OPEN POSITIONS BUT
COMING UP WITH CREATIVE WAYS TO
MEET CANDIDATE INTEREST, THE
DIVERSIFICATION OF OUR
APPLICANT POOLS AND THEN
ULTIMATELY WHO WE HIRE ANOTHER
AREA THAT WE SEE NEED FOR
WITHIN THE ORGANIZATION AS
SUPERVISOR MANAGER SUPPORT
PROGRAMS.
SO AS WE LOOK AT HOW DOES AN
EVOLVING WORKFORCE MOVE FROM A
COGAT ENVIRONMENT WHERE
PRIMARILY REMOTE TO THE
ENVIRONMENT THAT WE HAVE NOW IS
BEING HYBRID MAKING SURE THAT
WE'RE CONTINUING TO GIVE
MANAGERS AND SUPERVISORS THE
TOOLS IN TERMS OF MAKING SURE
THAT THEY KNOW THEY KNOW THE
NEEDS OF THE EMPLOYEES THAT ARE
DIFFERENT THAT ARE ON SITE
VERSUS REMOTE AND HOW DO WE
ADJUST ACCORDINGLY FOR THAT?
AND THEN WE ALSO HAVE NEEDS
ASSESSMENTS PLANNED FOR THREE
PRIMARY AREAS EMPLOYEE
ENGAGEMENT AGAIN, HOW DO WE
ENGAGE THE ORGANIZATION IN A
WAY THAT THEY'RE NOT SATISFIED
WITH?
THEY'RE COMMITTED AND THEY WANT
TO TO DO EXCEPTIONAL WORK AND
ENGAGE WITHIN THE COMMUNITY
WHETHER THAT BE THROUGH
RECOGNITION PROGRAMS, EMPLOYEE
FOCUS GROUPS, DIFFERENT KINDS
OF THINGS TO ENGAGE IN ALLOW US
TO PUSH FORWARD THE VALUES AND
THE CULTURE OF THE ORGANIZATION
IN THE COMMUNITY.
SO EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT IS A
HUGE ONE AND THEN PERFORMANCE
MANAGEMENT THAT'S AN AREA WHERE
THE CITY HAS SOME OPPORTUNITY
IN TERMS OF TRYING TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE'RE SETTING CLEAR
EXPECTATIONS AND GOALS FOR
EMPLOYEES AND THAT THEY
UNDERSTAND THOSE UPFRONT AND
THEN AGAIN PROVIDING THE
MANAGER SUPPORT PROGRAMS TO
MAKE SURE THAT THEY HAVE THE
ABILITY TO COMMUNICATE WITH
EMPLOYEES ABOUT WHAT THOSE
EXPECTATIONS ARE AND IF THERE'S
A FAILURE TO MEET THOSE
EXPECTATIONS, GIVING THEM THE
RESOURCES TO BE ABLE TO CORRECT
THEIR BEHAVIORS AND BE
SUCCESSFUL AND THEN TRAINING
AND DEVELOPMENT.
>> I THINK AS A PUBLIC SECTOR
EMPLOYEE WE HAVE COMPENSATION
AND BENEFIT CHALLENGES AND ONE
OF THE AREAS WHERE WE CAN DO
SOME THERE'S A COST ASSOCIATED
BUT NOT A DIRECT EMPLOYEE
COMPENSATION COST WHERE CAN WE
PROVIDE TRAINING AND
DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES THAT
PROVIDE EMPLOYEES, PARTICULARLY
THOSE THAT ARE RUNNING TOWARD
THE TOP OF THEIR COMPENSATION
SCALES, THE ABILITY TO FEEL
SATISFIED HAVE OPPORTUNITIES
FOR GROWTH WHETHER THAT BE
PROFESSIONALLY OR PERSONALLY
THAT KEEP THEM HERE WITH THE
CITY BEYOND TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
I THINK THEN WE REALLY NEED TO
START TO LOOK AT COMPENSATION
AND BENEFITS PARTICULARLY AS WE
TALK ABOUT FISCAL
RESPONSIBILITIES AND MAKING
SURE THAT THOSE ARE ALIGNED AS
CLOSELY AS WE CAN WITH
ORGANIZATIONS THAT WE'RE
COMPETING FOR TALENT AND THEN
WE WOULD LIKE TO IMPLEMENT
THOSE NEW INITIATIVES THAT WE
WERE DOING NEEDS ASSESSMENT FOR
THIS YEAR AND THEN CONTINUING
TO UTILIZE TECHNOLOGY.
I THINK THAT THERE'S A LOT
OF AREAS THAT THE TEAM HAS
IDENTIFIED THAT IF WE COULD
STREAMLINE THAT WOULD ALLOW US
TO BE ABLE TO FOCUS MORE ON THE
EMPLOYEE INTERACTION.
THE EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT PIECE
AND MAKING SURE THAT WE HAVE
THE CONNECTION WITH SERVICE
AREAS AND EMPLOYEES SOME OF THE
TRENDING CHALLENGES ACROSS ALL
OUR INDUSTRIES BUT ALSO IN THE
PUBLIC SECTOR IS PROMOTING
DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION.
WE WANT TO ATTRACT AND RETAIN
THE TOP TALENT AND COMPETING
WITH THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
OR OTHER LOCAL ENTITIES.
HOW DO WE DO THAT IN A WAY
THAT'S FISCALLY RESPONSIBLE,
THAT PROVIDES THE OPPORTUNITY
FOR PEOPLE TO KNOW THAT THIS IS
AN EMPLOYER OF CHOICE AND IT'S
A GREAT PLACE TO WORK AND NOT
ONLY DO WE SUPPORT THEM AT WORK
BUT WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THEY HAVE A WELL-ROUNDED WORK
LIFE BALANCE AGAIN, MANAGING
HYBRID WORKING MODELS IS GOING
TO BE A CHALLENGE AND THEN
PRIORITIZING EMPLOYEE
WELL-BEING AND MENTAL HEALTH IN
ADDITION TO THE WORK LIFE
BALANCE, UNDERSTANDING THAT
THERE'S A LOT OF THINGS THAT
ARE GOING ON POLITICALLY AND
HOW DO WE SUPPORT EMPLOYEES IN
A WAY THAT IT'S A SAFE
SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT WHEN
THEY'RE AT WORK AND THEN
ADAPTING TO CHANGING
REGULATIONS AND COMPLIANCE AND
IN MY OPINION ONE OF THE
BIGGEST CHALLENGES GOING
FORWARD IS HOW DO WE USE
TECHNOLOGY AND STILL MAINTAIN
THE EDGE?
>> THE HUMAN ASPECT OF THAT AND
TO STREAMLINE PROCESSES BUT
STILL MAKING SURE THAT WE'RE
THERE TO LISTEN TO EMPLOYEES BE
ABLE TO HEAR THEIR CONCERNS, BE
ABLE TO REACT TO THOSE AND
MAKING SURE THAT THEY ENJOY
WORKING HERE BECAUSE THE MORE
THEY'RE ENGAGED AND THE MORE
THEY ENJOY THEIR JOB, THE
BETTER SERVICE THEY ULTIMATELY
WILL PROVIDE TO THE COMMUNITY.
SO GOING FORWARD WE HAVE A
STRONG COMMITMENT TO CUSTOMER
SERVICE THAT'S REALLY THE KEY
TO EVERYTHING THAT WE WANT TO
DO WHETHER THAT CUSTOMER BE THE
CANDIDATE OR THE EMPLOYEE AND
MAKING SURE THAT THEY'RE
EXPERIENCE FROM START TO FINISH
IS ONE THAT THEY CAN LOOK BACK
ON AND SAY THAT WAS THAT WAS AN
EXPERIENCE THAT I ENJOYED EVEN
IF THERE ARE SOME CHALLENGES
BUT THAT IF WE'RE BEING
COMPARED TO ANOTHER
ORGANIZATION THIS THAT ONE
EXPERIENCE GIVES US A SLIGHT
EDGE AND THAT'S WHAT IN
COMBINATION WITH COMPENSATION
AND BENEFITS ALIGNMENT WITH THE
MARKET WILL ALLOW US TO BE THAT
EMPLOYER OF CHOICE.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE WE
CONTINUE TO IMPROVE AND
EVERYTHING THAT WE DO AND THEN
MAKING SURE THAT WE HAVE
INCLUSION, COLLABORATION AND
CREATIVITY AS WE MOVE FORWARD
AND NOT DOING THE SAME THINGS
THAT WE'VE ALWAYS DONE JUST
BECAUSE WE'VE DONE THEM THAT
WAY BUT REALLY ADJUSTING TO THE
NEEDS OF THE ORGANIZATION AS WE
MOVE FORWARD.
THANK YOU.
I'M HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS.
THANK YOU.
GET GIVEN THE CURRENT POLITICAL
CLIMATE MORE SO ON THE FEDERAL
LEVEL, HOW DO YOU DO YOU SEE
ANY CHALLENGES WITH THE
COMMITMENT TO SOCIAL JUSTICE,
EQUITY AND THE ELIMINATE THE
ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATORY
AND PREJUDICIAL PRACTICES IN
HIRING?
I MEAN DO YOU SEE HOW ARE YOU
GOING TO CONTINUE, YOU KNOW, TO
APPLY THOSE ARE OUR VALUES HERE
IN THE CITY OF UNIVERSO.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE'VE
STARTED TO DO IS REALLY LOOK AT
THE RECRUITMENT
HIRING PROCESS
AND MAKING SURE THAT WE'RE
EXPANDING OUR POOL
OF CANDIDATES DIFFERENT
DIFFERENT AVENUES, DIFFERENT
ORGANIZATIONS THAT WE CAN
PARTNER WITH.
AND SO REALLY STARTING FROM
WHEN THERE'S A VACANCY STARTING
TO WORK WITH THAT DEPARTMENT TO
IDENTIFY THEIR NEEDS, WHERE ARE
THEY LOOKING TO DIVERSIFY
WHETHER THEY HAVE MORE TENURED
EMPLOYEES, NEWER EMPLOYEES, THE
WHOLE COMPONENT OF WHAT ARE WE
MISSING AND HOW DO WE ADD
VALUE?
SO STARTING WITH WHAT ARE YOU
LOOKING FOR?
HOW DO YOU HOW CAN YOU IMPROVE
YOUR TEAM DYNAMICS STARTING
WITH HOW WE DO THAT JOB
DESCRIPTION WHERE WE POST IT
AND THEN MAKING SURE THAT
THERE'S A PROCESS INTERNALLY
THAT WE CAN IDENTIFY TO THE
EXTENT POSSIBLE.
WE DO HAVE SOME CURRENT
LIMITATIONS ON OUR ATRIUS
PLATFORM.
WE HAVE SOME PATHS FORWARD THAT
WE'VE STARTED TO RESEARCH IN
TERMS OF OTHER COMPONENTS THAT
WE CAN ADD AND LAYERED INTO
THAT.
SO WE'LL WORK WITH IT ON THAT
BUT REALLY MAKING SURE THAT
THAT THAT FIRST FOCUS FROM AN
I.T. FROM AN H.R. PERSPECTIVE
HAS REDUCED AS MUCH BIAS AS
POSSIBLE AND THEN LOOKING TO
ENSURE THAT WE HAVE APPROPRIATE
TRAINING WITH OUR MANAGERS AND
SUPERVISORS USING A CONSISTENT
PROCESS ACROSS THE CITY IN
TERMS OF THE STYLE
OF RECRUITING, MAKING SURE THAT
WE'RE UNDERSTANDING DIFFERENCES
IN TERMS OF HOW PEOPLE ENGAGE
IN THAT RECRUITMENT PROCESS AND
MAKING SURE THAT'S AS
ACCESSIBLE AS POSSIBLE AND THEN
THEN FROM THERE PUTTING IN SOME
PARAMETERS OR SOME EVALUATION
OF POST HIRE HOW IS THAT
EXPERIENCE AND BE ABLE TO LEARN
FROM THAT RIGHT NOW WE'RE NOT
GATHERING A LOT OF DATA IN
TERMS OF YOU KNOW, WE DO SOME
EXIT INTERVIEWS BUT WE'RE NOT
REALLY DOING POST HIRE
INTERVIEWS IN TERMS OF GETTING
INFORMATION ABOUT THEIR
EXPERIENCE OR STAY INTERVIEWS.
WHY ARE YOU SAYING HELP US
UNDERSTAND WHY YOU'RE STAYING
SO THAT WE CAN PROMOTE THAT AS
A GREAT PLACE TO WORK BECAUSE
OF THE VALUES THAT WE HAVE AS A
CITY.
SO THOSE ARE SOME OF THE THINGS
IN THE SHORT TERM THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT PRIMARILY FROM A
RECRUITMENT AND HIRING
PERSPECTIVE.
BUT WE'RE ALSO LOOKING AT ALL
OF OUR POLICIES FROM AN H.R.
PERSPECTIVE AND IN STARTING TO
REVIEW THAT ON A REGULAR BASIS
AND MAKING SURE THAT WE'RE
TOUCHING EQUITY AS A COMPONENT
OF EVERY REVIEW AND ALL ALL
TYPES OF EQUITY IN TERMS
OF WHAT WE WILL GET.
OK, THANK YOU.
I HAVE A FOLLOW QUESTION TO
THAT AND THIS WILL FALL UNDER
RECRUITMENT IN RELATION TO
POLICIES.
DO YOU SEE IMPLEMENTING THE
ANONYMOUS HIRING INITIATIVE
THAT CITY COUNCIL PASSED AS A
RESOLUTION BACK IN MARCH?
DO YOU SEE YOU KNOW THAT
HAPPENING?
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU'VE DONE
ANYTHING WITH IT THUS FAR BUT
DO YOU SEE IT HAPPENING IN
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE OR I
ANTICIPATE WILL BE ABLE TO MAKE
SOME MOVEMENT IN TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE.
I THINK IT'LL ALWAYS BE A
CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT MODEL IN
TERMS OF BEING ABLE TO MOVE IN
THAT DIRECTION.
I'VE BEEN ABLE TO PARTNER WITH
LAW LAURA ORDER A BIT AND BASED
ON MY TRANSITION AND A NUMBER
OF THINGS THAT WE'VE BEEN
TRYING TO DO SHE'S BEEN VERY,
VERY HELPFUL IN TRYING TO HELP
US MOVE THAT FORWARD.
THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS ON
THE FAIR THE FAIRNESS THAT YOU
HAD TWO TWO INITIATIVES YOU HAD
THE THE ANONYMOUS AS WELL AS
THE FAIR HIRING.
YES.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF THINGS THAT
WERE ALREADY IN PLACE FOR THEIR
FAIR HIRING THAT MIGHT NOT HAVE
BEEN COMMUNICATED.
SO OUR FIRST PIECE IS WE NEED
TO COMMUNICATE TO YOU WHAT WE
ARE DOING SO THAT YOU HAVE A
COMFORT LEVEL THERE AND THEN
LAURA IS GOING TO BE ABLE TO
HELP KIND OF GIVE US SOME
PARAMETERS TO START WITH AND
THEN OUR TEAM WILL BE ABLE TO
FOCUS IN ON THE H.R. SPECIFIC
PIECE OF IT.
SHE AND I HAVE BEEN WORKING
OVER THE LAST TWO TO THREE
MONTHS JUST TO KIND GET THAT IN
IN Q BUT I DO ANTICIPATE WE'LL
MAKE SOME MOVEMENT THIS YEAR.
THE TECHNOLOGY PIECE IS A
LITTLE BIT OF A CHALLENGE BUT
WE'RE WORKING ON WHAT WE CAN
DO.
OK THANK YOU.
THANKS FOR BEING HERE TONIGHT
AND GIVING US AN UPDATE.
GREAT TO HEAR OF THINGS THAT
ARE THAT ARE WORKING ON AND
KIND THE DESIRE TO TO GET FOLKS
ALIGNED WITH OUR ORGANIZATIONAL
GOALS.
THEY ARE DEPENDING ON WHERE
YOU'RE AT IN THE ORGANIZATION
IT'S BUT WE KNOW THAT FOLKS
THAT WORK FOR THE CITY ARE
MISSION DRIVEN AND AND IT'S NOT
AN EASY TIME TO BE WORKING IN
PUBLIC SERVICE AND IT'S THE
MESSAGES OUT THERE ARE NOT I
THINK WE WANT WE WANT TO REALLY
RECOGNIZE AND APPRECIATE THE
FOLKS THAT HAVE CHOSEN THIS
CAREER PATH.
AND SO I THINK THAT I WAS ALSO
GLAD TO HEAR YOU SAY IS
EMPHASIS ON RECOGNITION AND I
I'D LOVE TO BE ABLE TO SEE US
MORE EASILY PROVIDE ACCOLADES
TO FOLKS WHO ARE FOR FOR
RESIDENTS TO BE ABLE TO PROVIDE
POSITIVE COMMENTS BACK WHEN
THEY HAVE A GOOD INTERACTION.
I THINK SOMETIMES FOLKS REACH
OUT WHEN SOMETHING IS MAKING
THEM FEEL LESS UNHAPPY THAT I
WANT TO MAKE IT JUST AS EASY
FOR THEM TO BE ABLE TO TO REACH
OUT WHEN THEY NOTICE SOMETHING
GOOD.
>> THERE IS QUITE A BIT OF WORK
BEING DONE IN THAT AREA.
AGAIN, LAURA ORDERS ONE OF OUR
CHAMPIONS IN THAT AREA.
SHE'S BEEN WORKING WITH THE
EXECUTIVE TEAM TO CREATE A
COMPLIMENT COMPLAINT KIND
OF AVENUE IN ORDER TO BE ABLE
TO GET FRUSTRATIONS EXPRESSED
BUT ALSO WE DIDN'T WANT TO JUST
LEAVE IT OUT.
THERE'S JUST FRUSTRATIONS.
WE WANTED TO MAKE SURE THERE
WAS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR POSITIVE
FEEDBACK AS WELL AND THEN HOW
DO WE INCORPORATE THAT AND THE
ADMINISTRATOR DOES A NICE JOB
IN TERMS OF A RELATIVELY NEW
PROGRAM.
I THINK WHERE THERE'S QUARTERLY
REVIEW OF A DIFFERENT EMPLOYEES
AND A MODEL THERE.
BUT SO WE WANT TO GROW AND
CONTINUE.
THANK YOU AND THANK YOU FOR
SHARING YOUR REPORT TONIGHT.
IT'S REALLY HELPFUL INFORMATION
I WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR ORDINANCE CITY
COUNCIL PASS OF THE BAN THE BOX
INITIATIVE WHERE IT PROHIBITS
CITY CONTRACTORS FROM ASKING
APPLICANTS ABOUT THEIR CRIMINAL
HISTORY UNTIL PRIOR TO MAKING A
CONDITIONAL JOB OFFER.
AND I'M WONDERING, YOU KNOW,
COULD THAT ALSO BE AFFECTED BY
SOME OF THE FEDERAL CHANGES
THAT WE SEE?
>> SO I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
IN THE LAST SIX TO SEVEN MONTHS
IS THERE HAS BEEN A LOT
OF FOCUS IN ON MAINTAINING AS
MUCH CONFIDENTIALITY AND
SENSITIVITY AROUND SOMEBODY'S
BACKGROUND UNTIL AS LATE IN THE
PROCESS AS POSSIBLE.
WE'VE DONE A LOT OF THAT
PARTICULARLY IN THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND SO CHANGING THE
WAY IN WHICH WE DO THE PROCESS
AND WHERE WE ASK THOSE
QUESTIONS THEY USED TO BE ASKED
IN PANEL INTERVIEWS AND SO
SOMEBODY THAT MIGHT BE A
COLLEAGUE OF MINE EVENTUALLY
MIGHT HAVE HAD EXPOSURE TO MY
ANSWERS ABOUT SOMETHING THAT
REALLY THEY'RE NOT PART OF THAT
PART THE DECISION.
SO WE REMOVED IT FROM A
PARTICULAR PART IN THE PROCESS
WE'VE RETAINED IT AND WE JUST
MOVED IT INTO A DIFFERENT AREA
TO ENSURE THAT THE INFORMATION
IS COLLECTED AND FROM A
BACKGROUND PERSPECTIVE THAT WE
CAN REVIEW IT BUT WE REALLY
TRYING TO MAKE SURE THAT ALL
OF THAT SENSITIVE INFORMATION
IS A VERY MUCH A POST OFFER AND
THAT IT'S RELATIVE TO THE
POSITION THAT THEY'RE IN.
AND YOU KNOW, WE LOOK AT THE
SCOPE OF PERHAPS BACKGROUND,
THE SEVERITY OF WHAT MIGHT BE
ON IT AND IS IT EVEN RELEVANT
TO THE JOB THAT THEY'RE DOING
AND SO WE'VE REALLY REDUCED THE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE THAT HAVE
ACCESS TO THAT INFORMATION BUT
WE'VE ENSURED THAT THERE ARE
STILL NATURAL CONNECTION POINTS
SO THAT DIFFERENT PEOPLE HAVE A
MYSELF FOR EXAMPLE, THE CHIEF
MIGHT HAVE ACCESS TO A PART
OF IT.
AN H.R. PERSON MIGHT HAVE
ACCESS TO A PART OF IT.
I HAVE ACCESS TO BOTH OF SO
THAT IF I SEE A DISCREPANCY
THEN WE CAN BRING IT UP AND
HAVE A CONVERSATION SO WE'VE
REALLY LIMITED THE NUMBER
OF PEOPLE THAT HAVE ACCESS TO
THAT INFORMATION.
BUT I'LL TAKE IT BACK AS AN
INITIATIVE TO CONTINUE TO WORK
ON
.
THANK YOU ROBERT.
WE ARE VERY PLEASED WITH THE
CITY OF GREAT, GREAT WORK UP
AND DOWN THE LINE AND SO
GRATEFUL FOR THE QUALITY
OF LIFE THAT YOUR COMMUNITY TO
TO OBTAIN AND IT'S CRUCIAL THAT
WE HAVE A QUALITY WORKPLACE TO
TO MATCH IT.
SO THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THERE ARE SUCH KIND WORDS
AND I HAVEN'T EVEN SAID
ANYTHING MAYOR.
YOU DOUBLY SO.
GOOD EVENING MAYOR AND COUNCIL.
THANK YOU FOR THE OPPORTUNITY
TO CHECK IN WITH YOU ABOUT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THE PROCESS
THE PROJECT IS ONGOING BUT THIS
IS AN IMPORTANT MILESTONE IN
THE PROCESS.
WE'RE SHIFTING FROM ENGAGEMENT
TO ACTUALLY PRODUCING THE
DOCUMENT AND BECAUSE OF THAT
THE TIME WAS REALLY RIPE FOR US
TO CHECK SHARE WITH YOU A
COUPLE OF DIRECTION POINTS THAT
WE HAVE RECENTLY GARNERED FROM
OUR PLANNING COMMISSION BECAUSE
WE'RE SHIFTING INTO THIS MODE.
WE WANTED SOME CLARITY ON SOME
SOME ISSUES RELATIVE TO THAT
THEY ARE AROUND HOUSING,
EMPLOYMENT AND TAX BASE AND
STRUCTURE AND WANTED TO SHARE
WITH YOU A COUPLE OF THOSE
DIRECTIONS THAT WE'VE RECENTLY
RECEIVED FROM THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
HONESTLY, THEY ARE DISTINCT IN
SOME WAYS FROM WHAT I WAS
ENVISIONING BUT THAT'S WHY I
DON'T I'M NOT THE ONE
RESPONSIBLE FOR DRAFTING THIS
PLAN AND ISOLATION.
SO IN A MOMENT, SENIOR PLANNER
MICHELLE BENNETT IS GOING TO
SHARE WITH YOU AN OVERVIEW
OF THOSE AND THEN WE'LL ADDRESS
ANY QUESTIONS.
I WOULD SAY IT'S A REALLY
EXCITING TIME FOR US TO BE
DOING THIS COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
IT'S A REALLY EXCITING TIME FOR
US TO BE LAYING OUT OUR VISION
FOR THE CITY IN THE FUTURE.
BUT IT'S NOT WITHOUT CHALLENGES
WITH US LAYING OUT THAT VISION
FOR THE FUTURE, WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO BE REALLY MINDFUL WE
HAVE SOME REALLY SIGNIFICANT
STEPS IN ADDITION TO JUST SORT
OF DRAWING A MAP AS TO HOW
WE'RE GOING TO CULTIVATE AND
SUPPORT THE TYPE OF COMMUNITY
WE WANT TO EVOLVE INTO.
AND IT'S AN EXCITING TIME
BECAUSE WE'RE STARTING TO
ANSWER SOME OF THOSE QUESTIONS
AS IT RELATES TO INFRASTRUCTURE
AND A VARIETY OF WAYS.
YOU'RE GOING TO HEAR A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT SOLID WASTE HERE
LATER THIS EVENING.
SO WE HAVE A LOT TO THINK ABOUT
ABOUT HOW WE GROW OUR CITY.
BUT IT'S AN EXCITING TIME FOR
US TO AT LEAST PUT FORTH THE
VISION FOR WHERE WE WANT TO GET
TO.
BUT I WANT TO BE CLEAR AND
HONEST THAT IT'S GOING TO BE A
LOT OF HARD WORK AHEAD AND A
LOT OF RESOURCE DECISIONS WE'RE
GOING TO MAKE IN ORDER TO
ACHIEVE THOSE VISIONS THAT
WE'RE GOING TO LAY OUT IN A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
JUST AS A REMINDER, THE
PLANNING
COMMISSION DRAFTS THE
PLAN.
THEY APPROVE IT AND THEN THEY
DELIVER IT TO YOU FOR APPROVAL
OR REJECTION AND THEN THAT ONLY
AT THAT POINT DOES IT FORM THE
BASIS FOR OUR LAND-USE POLICY
GOING FORWARD.
AS A REMINDER, ONCE THAT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS DRAFTED,
NOTHING CHANGES.
IT'S OUR TO WORKLESS.
IT'S OUR GOAL, IT'S OUR TO DO
LIST AND THEN WE HAVE TO GET TO
WORK IMPLEMENTING THAT PLAN.
SO THAT'S REALLY IMPORTANT TO
KEEP IN MIND AS WELL.
SO LIKE I SAID, WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE MICHELLE IS GOING TO GIVE
YOU AN OVERVIEW OF SOME
OF THOSE IMPORTANT QUESTIONS
THAT WE POSED IN THE DIRECTION
WE'VE RECEIVED FROM THE
PLANNING COMMISSION IN THAT
REGARD TO SHARE WITH YOU AND
OF COURSE THE PUBLIC AND THEN
WE'LL HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS THAT YOU HAVE AFTER
THAT.
>> I THINK COMPLETES THOSE
CALLS THE MOST WHATEVER YOU OK?
GOOD EVENING COUNCIL.
LET ME START BY ORIENTING YOU
WHERE WE ARE IN THIS PROCESS
FEBRUARY TWENTY TWENTY FIVE WE
PLAN AFTER THIS EVENING TO
START DRAFTING THIS PLAN AND
SEND IT OFF TO OUR CONSULTANTS
AND HOPE THAT IN THE NEXT SIX
WEEKS OR SO WE WILL HAVE A
DRAFT TO SHARE.
YOU CAN SEE THAT RIGHT HERE ON
OUR TIMELINE HERE THAT WE HOPE
TO HAVE THE PLAN ADOPTED IN
NOVEMBER OF TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
AND IN ABOUT A MONTH WE MAY OR
MAY NOT BE COMING BACK TO ASK
FOR A LITTLE BIT MORE TIME AND
A LITTLE BIT MORE MONEY TO TO
COMPLETE THIS PLAN.
>> YOU CAN ALSO SEE HERE THAT
WE'VE BEEN VERY HEAVY ON
ENGAGEMENT FOR THE FIRST YEAR
OF THIS PROCESS AND THERE ARE
SOME SOME HIGHLIGHTS HERE AS TO
HOW WE REACHED OUT TO THE
COMMUNITY, HOW MANY PEOPLE
ATTENDED OUR EVENTS AND SHARED
THEIR INPUT.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S GET RIGHT INTO IT WITH
LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL.
SO THIS IS OUR FUTURE LAND USE
MAP.
WE'RE JUST THE LOW RISE THE
PROPOSED LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
IS THIS LIGHT YELLOW COLOR HERE
SO THAT CURRENTLY COVERS
EXACTLY THE SAME GEOGRAPHY AS
OUR ONE IN OUR TWO ZONES AND
THAT'S ABOUT THIRTY SIX PERCENT
OF THE CITY'S LAND IN OUR
CONVERSATIONS WITH THE
COMMUNITY MAYBE YOU ATTENDED IN
MARCH AND OCTOBER .
WE HAD SOME SESSIONS AT THE
LIBRARY WE PROVIDED SOME
VISUALS TO SHOW THE COMMUNITY
WHAT WE MEAN BY DENSIFYING THIS
PROPOSED LAND USE ONE OF OUR
DIRECTIVES FROM CITY COUNCIL
WAS TO FIND WAYS TO INCREASE
HOUSING SUPPLY INTENSIFY OUR
ARE ONE IN OUR TWO SO WE WENT
TO THE COMMUNITY AND WE SHOWED
THEM IMAGES OF WHAT IT WOULD
LOOK LIKE BECAUSE DENSIFYING
MEANS DIFFERENT THINGS TO
DIFFERENT PEOPLE.
SOME MIGHT BE IMAGINING JUST A
COUPLE EXTRA UNITS PER ACRE AND
SOME ARE IMAGINING TEN STORIES
RIGHT NEXT TO THEM.
SO IN DOING SO WE GOT QUITE A
BIT OF POSITIVE FEEDBACK, A LOT
OF SUPPORT FOR ABOUT FOUR UNITS
PER PERSON I THINK ABOUT
SEVENTY PERCENT OR SO OF THOSE
WHO ATTENDED OUR SESSIONS
SUPPORTED THAT LEVEL OF DENSITY
IN THE LAST FEW MONTHS IN
CONVERSATIONS WITH THE
SUBCOMMITTEE PLANNING THE
PLANNING COMMISSION
SUBCOMMITTEE THEY RAISED THE
QUESTION OF DO WE REALLY NEED
TO LIMIT THAT IF IT IS SO
DIFFICULT TO FIND HOUSING IN
ANN ARBOR, IS THERE ANY WAY
THAT WE COULD INCREASE DENSITY
EVEN FURTHER AND SO THEY HAVE
ASKED OR THE DIRECTION THAT
THEY PROVIDED FOR US IS UP TO
FOUR STORIES THAT WE DON'T SEEK
TO NECESSARILY LIMIT BY NUMBER
OF UNITS.
BUT MORE SO BY FORM AND SO MOST
PEOPLE'S PERSPECTIVE IS THAT
THEY CARE MORE ABOUT THIS SCALE
AND HOW IT FITS INTO THEIR
NEIGHBORHOOD THAN NECESSARILY
HOW MANY UNITS THERE ARE SO
THAT'S THE CURRENT DIRECTION
THAT WE ARE TAKING FROM THE
PLANNING COMMISSION ON LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL.
THERE ARE THERE ARE STILL SOME
THINGS TO CONSIDER THOUGH AND
THESE ARE THE IMAGES YOU CAN
SEE HERE AT THE BOTTOM THAT WE
SHOWED THE PUBLIC SO UP TO
TRIPLEX AND QUAD PLEX IS THE
MOST POPULAR.
THIS DOES PROVIDE MORE
OPPORTUNITY FOR LARGER SCALE
DEVELOPMENT IN THE CITY.
HOWEVER, AS WE LEARN MORE AND
MORE THROUGH SOME OF THE OTHER
STUDIES THAT ARE BEING DONE
WITH SANITARY SEWER AND WATER
THAT THERE MAY BE SOME UTILITY
INFRASTRUCTURE CHALLENGES WITH
LARGER DEVELOPMENT IN THESE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
THE OTHER THING TO CONSIDER IS
THAT LIKE I SAID, OUR
CONVERSATIONS WERE BASED ON
FOUR UNITS PER PARCEL AND SO
GOING DENSER THAN THAT WOULD BE
A DEPARTURE FROM WHAT WE
DISCUSSED WITH THE PUBLIC MIXED
USE HUBS.
SO ORIGINALLY THE FUTURE AND
LAND USE MAP PROPOSED ONE MIXED
USE HUB IN MORE CONVERSATIONS
WITH OUR CONSULTANTS WE THOUGHT
THAT IT WOULD MAKE SENSE TO
BREAK IT DOWN INTO THREE
DISTINCT MIXED USE HUBS.
THEY DO ALL STILL SHARE A
COMMON GOAL OF BECOMING
WALKABLE MIXED USE PLACES AND
THEY ALSO ALL WOULD PROVIDE THE
HIGHEST HEIGHTS AND GREATEST
DENSITY.
BUT I'LL WALK YOU THROUGH A BIT
OF THE DISTINCTIONS HERE AT
STEVEN EISENHOWER AS YOU CAN
SEE HERE, THIS IS THE BRIARWOOD
FOOTPRINT.
THIS WOULD BE THOUGHT TO BE
ANOTHER CORE LIKE A DOWNTOWN IN
THE SOUTHERN PART OF THE CITY,
THE INNOVATION AREA ON PLYMOUTH
ROAD UP NEAR NORTH CAMPUS WOULD
BE THOUGHT TO BE MORE FOCUSED
ON CERTAIN TYPES OF LAND USES
THAT WOULD BE SPINOFFS FROM YOU
EVMS NEW INVESTMENT MODEL WHICH
I'LL TALK A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT AND THEN OUR RETAIL HUBS
HERE THIS I BELIEVE IS URBAN
LAND ON WASHTENAW.
I'M THINKING ABOUT HOW TO
REIMAGINE THOSE BECAUSE
CURRENTLY THEY'RE NOT ANYONE'S
FAVORITE FORMAT AND WHAT CAN WE
DO TO MAKE THEM DENSER, MORE
URBAN?
OK, SO THIS MAP IS MEANT TO
SHOW THESE THREE MIXED USE HUBS
IN RELATION TO THE DC ONE
ZONING THE BLACK OUTLINE HERE'S
THE DC ONE ZONING SO YOU CAN
SEE IN SOME AREAS UP HERE IN
THE NORTH ON PLYMOUTH WE'VE
ACTUALLY PROPOSED TO
SUBSTANTIALLY EXPAND THE
INNOVATION ZONE GREATER THAN TO
SEE ONE UP THERE.
WE'VE ALSO DONE THAT HERE DOWN
NEAR NEAR BRIARWOOD AND EVEN IN
SOME AREAS WHERE WE WOULD
PROPOSE EXPANDING THE DOWNTOWN
.
OK, I'LL START WITH THE CORPS
DISTRICT BECAUSE I DO THINK IN
GENERAL THERE IS SOME CONSENSUS
AROUND THAT THIS AREA IS RIPE
FOR REDEVELOPMENT.
THERE IS A LARGE FOOTPRINT
HERE, LARGER PARCELS
SURROUNDING IT AND A LOT
OF PARKING LOT TO WORK WITH.
HOWEVER, IN THIS PART OF THE
CITY IS ONE OF THE MOST
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINED IN
TERMS OF UTILITIES AND ALSO
THIS QUESTION THAT THIS
REOCCURRING QUESTION THAT IF WE
ARE TO START ADDING RESIDENTIAL
TO THESE AREAS THAT PREVIOUSLY
DON'T HAVE THEM, ARE WE
FULFILLING OUR GOAL HERE
OF THESE 15 MINUTE
NEIGHBORHOODS?
DO WE HAVE THE PARKS, THE
TRANSIT, ALL THE OTHER
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO
SUPPORT THAT?
>> OK, THE INNOVATION DISTRICT
AGAIN UP ON PLYMOUTH NEAR NORTH
CAMPUS, THE ORIGINALLY THIS WAS
PROPOSED TO HAVE LIMITED
RESIDENTIAL USE PRINCIPALLY IT
WOULD BE AGAINST SOME OF THESE
KIND OF BIOTECH TYPE USES THAT
U OF M IS INVESTING IN TO
PROVIDE SOME SPACE FOR
POTENTIAL SPINOFFS FROM YOU
EVMS INVESTMENT AND THE REASON
WE PROPOSE LIMITED RESIDENTIAL
IS THAT THE MARKET FOR THAT IS
SO STRONG THERE IS A CONCERN
THAT IF WE WERE TO ALLOW IT
UNREGULATED THAT THAT IS WHAT
WOULD BE BUILT.
IT WOULD CROWD OUT ANY OTHER
TYPE OF USE THAT COULD BE BUILT
THERE.
>> SO LET ME TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT WHY WE PROPOSE THIS ZONE
U OF M HAS RECENTLY CHANGED HOW
THEY ARE INVESTING IN
INNOVATION IN TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR THEY HAD TWENTY EIGHT
STARTUPS LAUNCHED OVER FIVE
HUNDRED MILLION DOLLARS IN
VENTURE CAPITAL RAISED NOW MOST
OF THOSE INVESTMENTS WILL BE
HAPPENING ON CAMPUS AND WE DO
UNDERSTAND THAT HOWEVER MANY
OF THEM WERE TO BE SUCCESSFUL
ENOUGH TO SCALE UP DO WE HAVE
ROOM IN THE CITY TO HOUSE THEM
OR WOULD THEY HAVE TO LEAVE?
SO THIS IS AN IMPORTANT
CONSIDERATION AND THOUGHT THAT
THE PLANNING TEAM HAS HAD OF DO
WE WANT TO A LOT AND LAND FOR
THESE TYPES OF USES AND ALLOW
LIMITED RESIDENTIAL TO SUPPORT
THE RETAIL DISTRICTS.
>> SO AGAIN WE'RE THINKING HERE
ABOUT URBAN LAND, MAPLE
VILLAGE, WEST GATE, THESE AREAS
THESE RETAIL AREAS ARE SORT
OF ON THE FRINGE OF THE CITY
NEAR HIGHWAY INTERCHANGES.
SO THEY ARE VERY CAR CENTRIC.
THEY HAVE LARGE PARKING LOTS
LIKE I MENTIONED THEY ARE NO
ONE'S DESIRED FORMAT AND THE
GOAL WOULD BE TO TRANSITION
OVER TIME INTO WALKABLE MIXED
USE HUBS.
THERE WAS JUST A SLIGHT
DIFFERENCE IN HOW TO DO THAT.
AND SO STEPH HAD PROPOSED
RELAXING SOME OF THE FORM BASED
STANDARDS SO THAT WE COULD HAVE
A MORE INCREMENTAL APPROACH.
>> SO THINK OF LOTS IN THOSE
PARKING LOTS FOR EXAMPLE,
PLANNING COMMISSION WANTED A
MORE COMPLETE SORT OF OVERHAUL
OF THAT OF REDEVELOPMENT WHEN
WE EXPLAINED TO THEM THAT, YOU
KNOW, IN ORDER TO TRANSITION
THESE AREAS IT'S GOING TO TAKE
A LONG TIME AND THAT A LOT
OF THESE STORES OR THESE
BUSINESSES HAVE SIGNED 20 TO 30
OF 40 YEAR LONG LEASES.
SO SOMEONE WOULD HAVE TO COME
IN, BUY ALL OF THOSE LEASES
OUT, POTENTIALLY DEMOLISH THOSE
BUILDINGS POTENTIALLY UPSIZE
THEIR INFRASTRUCTURE BEFORE
THEY COULD EVEN START TO
REDEVELOP THAT.
THIS IS GOING TO DELAY THE
PROCESS QUITE A BIT AND SO THAT
IS SOMETHING TO CONSIDER.
BUT THEY WERE PRETTY STEADFAST
IN WANTING AND NOT WANTING TO
RELAX ANY OF THE THE STANDARD
SO THAT WE WOULDN'T KIND
OF INCREMENTALLY GROW IN THOSE
AREAS THAT THERE IS A HOPE THAT
IT WILL BE TAKING CARE OF ALL
AT ONCE
IN THE EMPLOYMENT
DISTRICT
, THE EMPLOYMENT
DISTRICT IS AN S INDUSTRIAL AND
THE RESEARCH PARK THERE'S A MAP
ON THE NEXT SLIDE THAT THAT
I'LL SHOW YOU THAT.
>> BUT THE IDEA BEHIND THIS IS
THAT WE WANT TO PRESERVE SOME
SPACE IN THIS CITY FOR THESE
TYPES OF USES.
>> THEY ARE INDUSTRIAL IN
NATURE NOT MAYBE IN THE
TRADITIONAL SENSE OF PEOPLE
THINKING OF REALLY NOXIOUS USES
THAT WOULD BE TERRIBLE TO LIVE
NEXT TO.
>> BUT THEY ARE STILL AND HAVE
BEEN ON AN INDUSTRIAL CORRIDOR
FOR FOR MANY YEARS.
>> SO THE IDEA WITH PRESERVING
THAT IS TO HELP PRESERVE A
DIVERSITY OF JOBS THAT NOT
EVERY JOB HERE IS RELATED TO
THE UNIVERSITY THAT THERE ARE
JOBS HERE THAT YOU DO NEED TO
BE IN PERSON THAT ARE MANUAL
LABOR AND THAT THERE SHOULD BE
PLACES PRESERVED FOR THAT IN
THE CITY THERE HAS BEEN SOME
PUSHBACK HERE THAT WE NEED
HOUSING AND THAT RIGHT NOW THIS
THE CITY CURRENTLY PROVIDES
FORTY NINE SORRY NINETY FOUR
PERCENT OF OUR LAND PERMITS
RESIDENTIAL.
OUR FUTURE LAND USE MAP WOULD
PROPOSE NINETY EIGHT BUT THE
PLANNING COMMISSION WANTS THERE
TO BE HOUSING PERMITTED IN A
HUNDRED PERCENT OF THE CITY
WHICH WOULD MEAN ON THIS
CORRIDOR AS WELL.
>> SO WE DID ACTUALLY REDUCE
THIS AREA FROM SEVEN HUNDRED
AND TWENTY EIGHT ACRES TO THREE
HUNDRED EIGHTY FOUR BUT YOU CAN
SEE HERE LIKE I MENTIONED S
INDUSTRIAL AND RESEARCH PARK
LIKE I MENTIONED S INDUSTRIAL
AND RESEARCH PARK IS AN AREA
THAT THE PLANNING COMMISSION
THINKS WOULD BE SUITABLE FOR
RESIDENT AND THAT IS PROBABLY
ONE AREA WHERE STUFF AND
PLANNING COMMISSION DIVERGE.
WE'VE ALSO TALKED TO THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
INNOVATION ABOUT THIS.
THE EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT WOULD
IF IT WERE TO REMAIN AS
PROPOSED ALLOW AND SUPPORT THE
CIRCULAR ECONOMY.
IT WOULD ALLOW SOME OF THE USES
THAT WE DON'T CURRENTLY HAVE
BUT THAT IF WE REALLY WANT TO
SUPPORT THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY
WOULD NEED.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, IF WE ARE GOING
TO HAVE IF WE'RE GOING TO
RECYCLE AFTER WE HAVE
DEMOLISHED A BUILDING, WE'RE
GOING TO NEED A SPACE WHERE WE
CAN SORT THROUGH ALL OF THAT
AND THAT MIGHT NOT BE A PLACE
SOMEONE WANTS TO LIVE NEXT TO.
WE ALSO HAVE A LOT OF PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS IN
THIS PART OF THE CITY SO THAT
IS SOMETHING ELSE WE NEED TO
CONSIDER IF WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
HIGH DENSITY HOUSING THERE.
>> AND LIKE I MENTIONED BEFORE,
IS THIS REALLY EVEN IF WE COULD
HAVE HOUSING THERE SOMEPLACE
THAT IS GOING TO BE WELL
SERVICED BY TRANSIT, BY PARKS,
ANY TYPE OF RECREATION OR IS IT
JUST A PLACE WHERE YOU CAN
BUILD WHERE WE CAN BUILD NOW
WITHOUT THINKING ABOUT THE
RAMIFICATIONS FOR FOR 2050?
>> SO THOSE ARE ALL THE KEY
POINTS THAT WE'VE BROUGHT UP
WITH THE PLANNING COMMISSION
AND THAT WE'D LIKE THAT WE'RE
HAPPY TO SHARE WITH YOU BUT
GOING TO COME BACK UP AND HELP
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS THAT YOU
MAY HAVE AND HOPEFULLY YOU HAVE
JAMIE ON THE LINE.
>> OK,
THANK YOU.
AND FIRST AND FOREMOST, THANK
YOU FOR ALL THE WORK THAT
EVERYONE IS PUTTING IN ON THIS.
IT'S A MASSIVE UNDERTAKING
GOING BACK TO THE ONE OR TWO
DISTRICTS I UNDERSTAND THAT
THREE STORIES AND QUITE UP TO A
COMPLEX RECEIVED A LOT
OF SUPPORT 70 SOME PERCENT WAS
WERE THE NOTIONS OF FOUR
STORIES.
FORTY EIGHT FEET OR UNLIMITED
NUMBERS OF UNITS DISCUSSED WITH
RESIDENTS IN THOSE SESSIONS AND
IF SO WHAT WAS THAT LEVEL
OF SUPPORT?
YEAH, THEY WEREN'T DISCUSSED
EXPLICITLY AS MICHELLE
INDICATED WHEN WE STARTED THIS
CONVERSATION WE STARTED WITH A
LOT OF THE COUNCIL DIRECTION
THAT IT WAS ONE OF THE
DIRECTIONS WAS INCREASING
HOUSING DENSITY IN ALL AREAS
OF THE CITY INCLUDING SINGLE
FAMILY NEIGHBORHOODS.
AND PRETTY QUICKLY WE FOUND AS
MICHELLE INDICATED THAT THAT
DENSIFYING MEANS VERY DIFFERENT
THINGS TO PEOPLE WHEN THEY HEAR
THAT WORD AND HOW THEY PICTURE
IT SOME PICTURE IT WELCOMING
SOME PICTURE WITH FEAR.
AND SO PRETTY QUICKLY WE
STARTED FOLLOWING A LOT
OF NATIONAL TRENDS TO THERE'S
BEEN A LOT OF OTHER COMMUNITIES
THAT HAVE FOUGHT IN THAT SCALE
OF ABOUT FOUR UNITS AND
FORMERLY SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO WE STARTED USING THAT AS A
WAY TO ILLUSTRATE AND WE'RE NOT
TALKING ABOUT UNLIMITED DENSITY
EVERYWHERE.
SO SO WE DIDN'T TALK ABOUT THAT
.
WE DIDN'T EXPLICITLY TALK ABOUT
FOUR STORIES AND UNLIMITED.
I WOULD SAY THE NUANCE OF THAT
WOULD BE IN THE CONTEXT OF WE
DID HEAR A LOT OF FEEDBACK FOR
INCREASING DENSITY IN AREAS THE
CITY I DON'T KNOW IN THE SPACES
OF A LOT OF SUPPORT FOR
EXPANDING DOWNTOWN A LOT
OF SUPPORT FOR EXPANDING
HOUSING ALONG OUR CAUSE.
I'M SURE THAT THERE'S SOME
BUILT IN TO THAT OVERWHELMING
POSITIVE FEEDBACK OF YEAH.
YOU KNOW, SOME COMPONENT OF I
DON'T CARE ABOUT THE NUMBER
OF UNITS BUT IN SHORT NO, WE
DIDN'T EXPLICITLY BRING THAT
TYPOLOGY TO SINGLE AND TWO
FAMILY NEIGHBORHOODS THAT EXIST
CURRENTLY IN THE CITY.
OK, ALL RIGHT.
TO ME THAT'S IT'S A CONCERN
IT'S A BIG CONCERN TO DEPART
FROM WHAT WAS WHAT TOLD TO
RESIDENTS IN THOSE ENGAGEMENT
SESSIONS SO IF I COULD JUST ADD
BUT I THINK I DON'T SPEAK FOR
THE PLANNING COMMISSION
OF COURSE.
BUT I THINK THEY WERE
RECOGNIZING THE IMPORTANCE
OF THE SCALABILITY TO BE
IMPORTANT.
AND I AND I THINK THAT THAT WAS
AS MUCH OF IT AND GAVE US THAT
DIRECTION TO LOOK AT THAT AS I
DON'T THINK THAT THEY WERE I
DIDN'T TAKE IT AS ANYTHING GOES
BY ANY STRETCH IN THOSE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
BUT IT WAS IT WAS A QUESTION
THAT WHETHER OR NOT THE NUMBER
OF UNITS WAS THE RIGHT WAY TO
TO DO THAT SCALE SO AND I DON'T
SIT HERE KNOWING WHAT THAT
RECOMMENDATION WILL BE BUT BUT
I THINK THE PLAN IS GOING TO
ATTEMPT TO DEFINE OR IDENTIFY
THE NEED TO FIGURE OUT WHAT
FORM BASED SCALE IS TO SORT
OF GET TO SOME OF THOSE
CONCERNS BECAUSE CERTAINLY EVEN
WITH THAT I'M SURE THAT THERE
ARE SOME THAT WERE LIKE I
THOUGHT YOU SAID FOUR UNITS AND
THAT'S IT.
I THINK THAT THERE'S PROBABLY
ANOTHER CATEGORY OF PEOPLE WHO
ARE MORE INTERESTED IN WHAT THE
SCALABILITY OF IT IS AND AREN'T
SO IMPORTANT WHETHER THAT'S
THREE UNITS OR FOUR UNITS OR
SIX UNITS.
SO SO I DON'T WANT I DON'T WANT
THAT TO GO UNSAID.
I THINK THAT THERE WAS A
RECOGNITION THAT THERE NEEDS TO
BE A SCALABILITY AND THAT'S
SOMETHING WE THINK WE CAN FIND
IN THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO
PRESENT THAT VISION.
>> OK, GOOD.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER REGINA.
>> THANK YOU MAYOR.
THANK YOU FOR THE PRESENTATION
ACKNOWLEDGING OUR NEED FOR MORE
HOUSING WHICH WAS DRIVING THIS
CONVERSATION AND BUT ALSO OUR
DESIRE TO BE A CITY THAT IS
ENCOURAGING OF INNOVATION AND
DIVERSE BUSINESSES AND STARTUPS
AND THINGS LIKE THAT I GUESS
CAN YOU MEND OR CAN YOU TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT WHY I
THINK I HEARD YOU MENTION IN
THE INNOVATION ZONE THERE WOULD
BE RESTRICTION ON RESIDENTIAL.
CAN YOU TALK TO ME CAN YOU TALK
A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT WHY
THAT RECOMMENDATION EXISTS, WHY
THAT'S NECESSARY AND WHAT THAT
ACTUALLY MEANS FOR A ZONE LIKE
THAT?
GO AHEAD.
I CAN START BECAUSE THERE IS SO
MUCH PENT UP DEMAND FOR
HOUSING.
THE FEAR IS THAT IF WE DON'T
LIMIT THE AMOUNT IN THAT ZONE
THAT IT COULD COMPLETELY TAKE
OVER.
SO IF IF IT IS MIXED USE IN
THAT IT ALLOWS FOR THESE
BIOTECH COMPANIES AND
RESIDENTIAL THERE IS A CONCERN
THAT IT COULD ALL BECOME
RESIDENTIAL BECAUSE OF THE
DEMAND FOR THAT IS SO HIGH
WHILE WE'RE WAITING FOR THESE
SORT OF STARTUPS TO SCALE UP AS
TO EXACTLY HOW WE REGULATE
THAT, WE'VE TOUCHED ON THAT A
LITTLE BIT WITH SOME CASE
STUDIES.
I DON'T KNOW IF THEY'RE
RESTRICTED BY SQUARE FOOTAGE OR
PERCENTAGE OF THE LAND BUT
THERE ARE SOME MECHANISMS FOR
DOING THAT THAT ARE AVAILABLE
AND I WOULD I WOULD JUST ADD
THAT THAT IT'S A MARKET
PRESSURE WHEN OUR OUR OUR
PRESUMPTION IS THAT WHEN
RESIDENTIAL MARKET PRESSURE IS
PITTED UP AGAINST MAYBE
INNOVATIONS BASE EMPLOYMENT
ZONES YOU KNOW, YOU SAW
PICTURES OF A THRIFT STORE OF A
COFFEE SHOP WHEN GIVEN THOSE
PRESSURES COMING TO THOSE SITES
,THE RESIDENTIAL MARKET
PRESSURE PROBABLY CARRIES A
BIGGER STICK AND SO WITHOUT A
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK THAT
EITHER PROHIBITS OR LIMITS THE
ABILITY OF THAT MARKET STICK TO
IMPACT AND POTENTIALLY DISPLACE
THOSE USERS.
THAT WAS THE FORMATION FOR US
CONSIDERING LIMITING
RESIDENTIAL INNOVATION ZONE AND
PROHIBITING IT AND THE
EMPLOYMENT ZONE.
SO THAT'S THAT'S EXPLICITLY
WHERE THE BASIS COMES FROM.
>> PLANNING COMMISSION LIKE YOU
SAID HOUSING I THINK IS WHAT I
HEARD FROM THEM IS THAT IS JOB
ONE AND IT'S PREFERABLE IT'S
MORE IMPORTANT AND ELEVATED
THAN THESE OTHER IDEALS.
AND THEN CAN YOU ALSO I THINK I
HEARD YOU MENTIONED
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS AND
CHALLENGES.
CAN YOU GO INTO THAT A LITTLE
BIT MORE AND HOW THAT MIGHT
IMPACT THE OUTCOME OF THE PLAN?
>> YEAH, LIKE I SAID, IT'S AN
EXCITING TIME.
WE'RE STILL I DON'T COME TO YOU
HERE WITH DEFINITIVE ANSWERS IN
THAT REGARD.
PEOPLE IN THE ROOM THAT HAVE A
BETTER SENSE OF THAT.
BUT WE ARE STARTING TO ANSWER
SOME OF THOSE QUESTIONS.
WE'RE STARTING TO ANSWER SOME
OF THE VERY SPECIFIC QUESTIONS
ABOUT THINGS LIKE SANTARUS WHO
ARE STORMWATER, WATER, ALL
OF THOSE ARE THOSE ANALYZES
COME BASED ON PRINCIPLES,
RIGHT?
THEY COME BASED ON PROJECTIONS
HOW MANY PEOPLE WATERS ARE USED
NOW AND WHAT IS OUR PROJECTED
USE.
AND SO THE IMPACT OF THOSE
STUDIES IS GOING TO I WOULD SAY
IMPACT THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF OUR VISION IN THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND AN
EXTREME EXAMPLE IF WE PUT SOME
ZONE ON THAT MAP IT SAYS WE
THINK THAT THIS IS A HIGH
POTENTIAL FOR DENSIFICATION
GROWTH AND A FULL DIVERSITY
OF USES BUT SIMILAR WE FIND OUT
THAT THERE ARE INFRASTRUCTURE
NEEDS THAT ARE GOING TO BE
BARRIERS TO REALIZING THE
DEVELOPMENT AT THAT GEOGRAPHY
OF THAT SCALE.
IT'S GOING TO BE REALLY
IMPORTANT THAT WE COMMUNICATE
IN THAT PLAN THAT WE HAVE TO
ANSWER THOSE QUESTIONS AND
FACILITATE THAT SUPPLY BEFORE
WE FLIP THE SWITCH TO ALLOW
THOSE LAND USERS TO COME IN
PLACE TO TO GET IMPLEMENTED.
WE CAN THE COMPLAINT IS THE
APPROPRIATE PLACE TO IDENTIFY
THAT AS OUR GOAL BUT IT'S ALSO
THE APPROPRIATE PLACE TO LAY
OUT THE VERY DELIBERATE WAY IN
WHICH WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
IMPLEMENT IN ORDER TO GET TO
THAT GOAL.
SO IN SHORT, I THINK IT'S GOING
TO IMPACT OUR ABILITY TO MOVE
QUICKLY OR MORE SLOWLY WITH THE
RIGHT INFRASTRUCTURE AND
PRIORITIZATION TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE'RE NOT GETTING TOO FAR
AHEAD OF THE FOLLOWING PROJECTS
THAT RESPOND TO THE CHANGES
THAT WE PUT INTO PLACE.
>> COULSTON, THANK YOU AND
THANK YOU FOR THIS PRESENTATION
.
THIS IS SIMILAR TO COUNCIL
MEMBER RODENAS QUESTION.
IT'S IN REGARDS TO CREATING
RESIDENTIAL ZONES AND
INDUSTRIAL ZONING.
SO I BELIEVE I'M ONE OF THEM
TOO.
I WANTED TO KNOW FROM ALL
OF YOU IN TERMS OF THE COST TO
GET THAT READY.
I MEAN YOU TALKED A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE
CURRENTLY ARE THOSE AREAS, FOR
EXAMPLE, SAFE IN TERMS
OF ENVIRONMENTAL TOXINS, EVEN
NOISE?
>> ARE THEY INHABITABLE FOR
RESIDENTIAL UNITS?
>> IF NOT, DO YOU GUYS KIND
OF TAKE THAT INTO CONSIDERATION
IN TERMS OF THE COST TO GET AN
AREA READY?
SO GENERALLY WHEN WE'RE WHEN
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT IT FROM A
CONFLICT PERSPECTIVE SO
GENERALLY WE AND A LOT
OF COMMUNITIES HAVE GONE TOO
FAR TO SEGREGATE AND USE THIS I
I STAND HERE BEFORE YOU
BELIEVING THAT PART OF THE
REASON I SAY THAT IS BECAUSE WE
ACTUALLY HAVE A LOT OF NUISANCE
PROTECTIONS THAT ARE PRETTY
EQUALLY DISTRIBUTED REGARDLESS
OF LAND USE OR GEOGRAPHY ACROSS
THE CITY.
I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE'LL HAVE TO THINK ABOUT IS AS
WE LEAN INTO MORE MIXED USES
AND A GREATER SENSE OF THE
WORD, IT'S ONE YOU KNOW, IT'S
ONE THING TO SAY COMMERCIAL
RESIDENTIAL BUT THEN IF WE
START DOING MATERIAL SORTING
FACILITIES AND RESIDENTIAL WE
MIGHT HAVE TO RECONCILE SOME
OF THOSE BECAUSE IT MIGHT BE
MORE CHALLENGING TO MEET ALL
OF THOSE NUISANCE REQUIREMENTS
.
SO SO I DON'T I SEE THAT AS
ANSWERABLE AS IT RELATES TO
TOXINS AND THE LIKE.
IT'S HARD TO PAINT THAT WITH A
BROAD BRUSH THAT'S REALLY SO
SITE SPECIFIC.
IT IS POSSIBLE THAT THERE COULD
BE A HISTORIC USE THAT REALLY
LIMITS THE VIABILITY OF A SITE
BEING CONVERTED TO RESIDENTIAL
.
>> I I WOULDN'T I WOULDN'T I
WOULDN'T HAZARD A GUESS BUT I
WOULDN'T THINK IT'S THE
MAJORITY OF THE AREA THAT WE'RE
PROPOSING HERE AND WE HAVE A
LOT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
TOOLS HERE IN THE STATE THAT WE
CAN WE CAN TAKE THIS AS FAR AS
POSSIBLE TO TRY AND SOLVE THOSE
ANSWERS SO IT'S POSSIBLE THAT
THERE COULD BE SOME SORT
OF ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS THAT A
LIMITING FACTOR.
IT'S IT'S HARD FOR ME TO
PROJECT THAT WOULD BE
WIDESPREAD.
>> PART OF THAT IS BECAUSE WE
HAVEN'T HAD A HISTORY OF REALLY
HEAVY MANUFACTURING HERE THAT
SOME OTHER COMMUNITIES HAVE HAD
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS.
THANK YOU.
SHE'S EXCITED TO HEAR ABOUT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING PROCESS.
ALWAYS A FEW COMMENTS REGARDING
THE LOW RISE DISTRICT SIMILAR
TO COUNCIL MEMBER IGHER.
I THINK THAT I SHARE SOME
CONCERNS THAT WE'VE HAD
CONVERSATIONS WITH THE
COMMUNITY RECEIVED SOME
FEEDBACK THERE AND SEEM TO BE
HEADING POTENTIALLY A DIFFERENT
DIRECTION.
I THINK THE FEEDBACK THAT YOU
RECEIVED SEEMS VERY, VERY
CONSISTENT WITH WHAT I'VE HEARD
FROM RESIDENTS AROUND A
COMFORT WITH GENTLED GROWTH AND
DENSITY WITHIN THE
NEIGHBORHOODS AND I WOULD
CONCUR WITH PLANNING THE
MISSION THAT FOLKS PROBABLY
TEND TO CARE MORE ABOUT FORUM
AND LESS CONCERN ABOUT THE
NUMBER OF UNITS.
BUT I THINK FOR THAT I WOULD
DIFFER AS I THINK THERE'S A
REAL DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FOUR
STORIES AND MAYBE WHAT WAS
PRESENTED WITHIN THOSE
CONVERSATIONS AND BEFORE WE
WOULD HEAD THAT DIRECTION I
WOULD THINK THAT IF WE WERE WE
PROBABLY NEED TO GET SOME MORE
COMMUNITY FEEDBACK AROUND THAT
AND I'M NOT SURE WE WANT TO
REVISIT GOING BACK TO THE
BEGINNING THE PROCESS.
SO I KNOW WE HAVE A TIMELINE
HERE AROUND THE CONVERSATIONS
AROUND MIXED-USE HUB'S WE'VE I
THINK WE'VE WE'VE SOCIALIZED
THE COMMUNITY A LOT AROUND THE
CONCEPT OF TCV ONE AND I CAN
UNDERSTAND THAT WE'RE LEARNING
THINGS AS A COMMUNITY AND AS
PLANNING STAFF AROUND WHAT'S
WORKING, WHAT'S NOT.
>> ONE OF THE PRIORITIES THAT I
THINK THAT WE SHARE IS THAT WE
WANT TO SEE INFILL HAPPEN IN
WAYS THAT'S NOT CONTINUING SORT
OF A OF A LAND USE FORM THAT WE
DON'T SEEM TO SEE TO BE VERY
HEALTHY STRIP MALL TYPE
DEVELOPMENT.
AND SO I WOULD BE UNCOMFORTABLE
WITH US MOVING AWAY FROM THAT
IF THERE'S MODIFICATIONS THAT,
YOU KNOW, ALLOW REDEVELOPMENT
TO HAPPEN IN TERMS IN TERMS
OF INFILL WITH GREATER DENSITY
AND MORE FLEXIBILITY IN TERMS
OF MIXED USE, I WOULD BE
COMFORTABLE WITH THAT.
>> I THINK FOCUS ON WHAT SIDE
OF TOWN THE FIFTH WARD OR
REALLY YOU KNOW, THEY SEE THIS
IS A REALLY GREAT PLACE TO LIVE
BECAUSE THERE ARE SO MANY
SERVICES THERE AND SO I THINK
WE WANT TO TRY TO FILL IN US
FILL IN THAT SPACE WITH WITH
ADDITIONAL ADD USE.
NOW I'M REMEMBERING CORRECTLY
THAT THE CITY NEEDS TO UPDATE
ITS LAND USE PLAN AS REQUIRED
BY LAW EVERY FIVE YEARS.
IS THAT CORRECT?
IT'S REQUIRED TO REVIEW EVERY
FIVE YEARS.
>> THAT'S A GOOD POINT.
THANK YOU.
THANKS FOR THAT.
AND I I THINK I'M WONDERING IF
THERE ARE OPPORTUNITIES FOR US
TO BE THINKING ABOUT THAT FIVE
YEAR PROCESS, THE FIVE YEAR
MARK IN WAYS OF INTEGRATING
SOME OF THIS FEEDBACK THAT
WE'RE CONTINUING TO RECEIVE IF
THE INFRASTRUCTURE IS NOT, YOU
KNOW, APPROPRIATE YET IN
CERTAIN AREAS TO BE ABLE TO
SUPPORT ADDITIONAL GROWTH.
BUT WE KNOW THAT THE COMMUNITY
CONSENSUS IS THAT WE NEED MORE
HOUSING.
YOU KNOW, HOW DO WE FILL THAT
IN AND NOT JUST YOU KNOW,
CONTINUE TO RUBBERSTAMP OUR
PLAN FOR THE NEXT 30 YEARS KIND
OF LIKE, YOU KNOW, SO I DON'T
KNOW IF THERE'S IF THERE'S IF
YOU'VE THOUGHT ABOUT SOME
DIFFERENT MARKERS THAT MIGHT BE
ABLE TO BE ABLE TO HELP US AS
WE GET TO THOSE POINTS.
>> I DO THINK AS PART
OF IMPLEMENTING ACTION WE ARE
HOPING TO HAVE CERTAIN METRICS
THAT WE CONTINUE TO TRACK AND
THAT EVEN THOUGH EVERY FIVE
YEARS IT'S REQUIRED BY LAW THAT
WE WOULD BE HAVING, YOU KNOW,
AN ANNUAL REPORT TO TALK ABOUT
OUR PROGRESS AND THAT THIS
REMAINS A LIVING DOCUMENT AND
THAT WE CAN JUST MONITOR OUR
PROGRESS AND THINGS ARE GOING
TO SHIFT AND CHANGE RIGHT
BEFORE TWENTY FIFTY AND SO WE
JUST HAVE TO STAY SOMEWHAT
NIMBLE AND ON TOP OF THAT
COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK, THANK YOU
GUYS.
SO MUCH FOR THIS.
I THINK YOU'RE EXACTLY RIGHT IN
STATING YOU KNOW, THAT THIS IS
A BIG CHANGE FOR THE CITY IN A
IN A BIG WAY BUT ALSO IN A VERY
POSITIVE WAY UPDATING OUR
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS NO SMALL
FEAT.
SO THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR
WORK ON THIS.
MY QUESTION IS KIND OF ALONG
THE LINES OF WHAT MY WARD THREE
COLLEAGUES ASKED IN THE AREAS
OF PROPOSED LIMITATION FOR
HOUSING, THE MIXED USE HUBS,
THE INNOVATION AND EMPLOYMENT
ZONES THAT THANK YOU.
IS IT POSSIBLE TO ALLOW HOUSING
NOW AND THEN POTENTIALLY LIMIT
IT LATER IF IT DOES APPEAR THAT
HOUSING IS OVER WHELMING THESE
OTHER USES AS PREDICTED IF IT
ACTUALLY MATERIALIZES?
YOU KNOW, IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING
THAT NO HOUSING HAS BEEN BUILT
YET UNDER THAT NEW T7 ZONES FOR
INSTANCE.
>> SO WE HAVEN'T SEEN THAT
HOUSING DEMAND, YOU KNOW,
BREAKTHROUGH IN THOSE AREAS.
WHY DO WE NECESSARILY ASSUME
THAT FOR THESE NEW AREAS?
I MEAN I KNOW THEY'RE NOT THE
SAME BUT THEN I GUESS THAT THEN
IS THAT A QUESTION OF DO WE
HAVE TO HAVE THIS ONE SHOT AT
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OR IS IT
SOMETHING WE CAN TWEAK YEARS
DOWN THE LINE IF THINGS DON'T
QUITE PAN OUT AS PLANNED?
>> SO I GUESS THAT'S MY
QUESTION.
THE SHORT ANSWER IS YES, YOU WE
COULD MAKE A LAND USE DECISION
THAT'S MORE INCLUSIVE NOW AND
THEN RECONSIDER IT AT SOME
POINT IN THE FUTURE.
I THINK I WOULD I WOULD JUST
SHARE THAT IT'S IT'S NOT
IMPOSSIBLE BUT IT'S HARDER TO
GO BACK THAN IT IS FORWARD.
SO JUST PRACTICALLY SPEAKING,
THINK ABOUT NONCONFORMITY IS
LIKE YOU KNOW, ZONING IS A
PROSPECTIVE SO WHEN WE MAKE A
CHANGE WE DON'T REQUIRE
EVERYBODY TO WHO HAS DONE
SOMETHING IN THE PAST TO CHANGE
IT.
BUT IN THE EVENT WE FOR FOR
EXAMPLE ESTABLISHED ALLOWED
HOUSING IN THE INDUSTRIAL THE
MANUFACTURING ZONES THAT WE
DON'T ALLOW TODAY AND
DEVELOPMENT HAPPEN THERE AND
THEN WE CHANGE OUR MIND, WE
WOULD BE RENDERING THOSE
PROPERTIES NONCONFORMING.
SO THAT'S GOING TO PROVIDE SOME
LIMITATIONS ON THERE.
SO IT'S IT'S NOT IMPOSSIBLE BUT
IT'S MORE CHALLENGING THAN
GOING THE OTHER DIRECTION.
I WOULD I JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR
THOUGH
WE ARE PART OF THE GOAL
HERE IS TO BE VERY TRANSPARENT
WITH YOU BASED ON OUR DIRECTION
FROM THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> THERE IS NO LIMITATION IN
THOSE ZONES.
YOU KNOW, WE WE JUST WANTED TO
BE FORTHRIGHT ABOUT SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT WE WERE THINKING
ABOUT.
THESE ARE FACETS OF THE
RECOMMENDATION AND THE PLAN WE
WANTED TO SHARE THAT WITH
OF COURSE THE PLANNING
COMMISSION BECAUSE IT'S THEIR
PLAN TO DRAFT.
BUT WE ALSO WANTED TO SHARE
WITH YOU BECAUSE ULTIMATELY
IT'S GOING TO LAND ON YOUR DESK
TOO.
SO I DO WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT
WE WERE SHARING SOME OF OUR
RECOMMENDATIONS IN REGARDS TO
THE EMPLOYMENT ZONE IN THE
INNOVATION ZONES IN THE THE
FORMER WAS TO PROHIBIT
RESIDENTIAL.
THE LATTER WAS TO LIMIT IT BUT
BASED ON THE DIRECTION FROM
PLANNING COMMISSION WE
ANTICIPATE SEEKING THE
OPPORTUNITY FOR A CENTRAL AND
ALL OF THOSE.
BUT I DO WANT TO EMPHASIZE THAT
WE WILL HAVE TO BE REALLY
THOUGHTFUL ABOUT MAKING SURE
THAT THE TIMING OF WHEN WE
IMPLEMENT THAT GOAL I THINK
IT'S EASY FOR HER TO ARTICULATE
A VISION AND THE PLAN.
WE'VE GOT TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE'RE GOING BE ABLE TO SUPPORT
THOSE BUILDINGS AND THE REASON
I THINK YOUR MAYBE YOUR LAST
QUESTION THAT IS WHY DO WE
THINK IT MIGHT HAPPEN THERE
VERSUS OTHER PLACES?
>> THE OTHER AREAS HAVE BEEN
OPEN TO RESIDENTIAL AND
COMMERCIAL FOR SOME TIME AND
IT'S NOT TO SAY THAT I'M A REAL
ESTATE PROFESSIONAL BUT I THINK
PART OF THE REASON THAT AN AREA
LIKE SOUTH INDUSTRIAL IS REALLY
ATTRACTIVE IS BECAUSE THE COST
AND THE VALUATION OF THOSE
BUILDINGS MIGHT BE LESS THAN
THEY ARE IN WASHINGTON OR MIGHT
BE LESS THAN THEY ARE IN
PLYMOUTH.
AND SO THAT'S WHY I THINK THERE
MIGHT BE AN INCREASED CHANCE
FOR ONE OF THE USES OF THOSE
SITES TO BE REALIZED AS
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT MAYBE
AT A DIFFERENT PACE BECAUSE
OF THE ECONOMICS OF IT.
THANK YOU COUNSEL.
NO CORNELL NO ECHO MY
COLLEAGUE'S APPRECIATION FOR
THE HARD WORK AND COUNCIL
MEMBER MALIK ACTUALLY ASKED ONE
OF MY QUESTIONS SO I THINK I'LL
BE QUICK.
YOU MENTIONED IN EXCUSE ME THE
EMPLOYMENT ZONE THAT YOU WERE
REDUCING ACRS ZONED FOR
INDUSTRIAL FROM SEVEN HUNDRED
AND TWENTY EIGHT TO THREE
HUNDRED AND EIGHTY FOUR AND WAS
WHAT WAS THAT REZENDE TWO AS
PART OF THE NEW COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN IS THAT FOR HOUSING WHAT
IS THE INTENDED PURPOSE
OF INDUSTRIAL AND SO WHAT'S THE
FUTURE LAND USE FOR THOSE
AREAS?
I'D HAVE TO LOOK AT THE MAP
YEAH I THINK SOME OF IT IS SOME
OF IT IS CORRIDOR RESIDENTIAL
LIKE ALONG HURON TO THE NORTH
OF DOWNTOWN.
SIMILARLY ALONG ST. ST. BAY I'D
HAVE TO FOLLOW BUT WITH WITH A
DETAILED MAP BUT YEAH WE DID A
GOOD JOB TELLING YOU WHAT'S NO
LONGER MANUFACTURING BUT ALL
OF THOSE ZONES WOULD ALLOW
HOUSING WHATEVER THEY ARE.
COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA THANK YOU.
THIS IS MAYBE JUST A FOLLOW UP
ON MY QUESTION FROM BEFORE AND
YOU KNOW THAT HOUSING OBVIOUSLY
AGAIN DRY DRIVING THIS
CONVERSATION WITH OUR DEMAND
FOR HOUSING AND I THINK YOU
KNOW, I AM ALSO HEARING FROM
YOU KIND OF SOME OF THE MARKET
PRESSURE THAT MAY EXIST ON SOME
OF THESE PROPERTY IS IF THERE
ISN'T TO ALLOW KIND OF EITHER
RESIDENTIAL OR NO OR ARUZ.
RIGHT.
AND SO HOW MUCH THE VALUE
OF THAT PROPERTY GOES UP IF
SUDDENLY YOU CAN PUT X NUMBER
OF UNITS ON AS OPPOSED TO JUST
THE THRIFT SHOP OR THE
COFFEE SHOP AND SO I GUESS
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT THOSE
BUSINESSES CONTRIBUTE TO KIND
THE THINGS THAT EVERYONE LOVES
ABOUT ANN ARBOR AND TRYING TO
BALANCE THAT WITH OUR HOUSING
DEMAND.
I GUESS IN THE CURRENT PLANS IF
THERE ARE THESE AREAS THAT HAVE
SOME RESTRICTIONS ON
RESIDENTIAL USE, WHAT
PERCENTAGE OF THE CITY WOULD
HAVE A RESIDENTIAL PURPOSE?
WHAT WHAT WHAT IS THE
PERCENTAGE THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT RESTRICTING?
OK, SO CURRENTLY 94 PERCENT
OF THE CITY PERMITS
RESIDENTIAL.
WE ARE PROPOSING NINETY EIGHT
PERCENT.
SO IT'S JUST AN EMPLOYMENT ZONE
THAT'S TWO PERCENT OF LAND THAT
WOULD NOT ALLOW HOUSING BUT AT
LEAST THAT'S WHAT WE PROPOSED.
AND SO PLANNING COMMISSION
WANTS IT TO BE ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT WITH THAT 98 PERCENT
THOUGH WE HAVE SOFTENED QUITE A
BIT.
SO WE HAVE PROJECTED THAT IT
WOULD BE BETWEEN THIRTY TO
NINETY SEVEN THOUSAND UNITS
OVER BUT POTENTIALLY THAT'S
WHAT WOULD BE ENABLED NOT
GUARANTEED WHAT WOULD COME THAT
WOULD IS WHAT WOULD BE ENABLED
UP THROUGH TWENTY FIFTY WHICH
IS A SIGNAL IF WE CAN INCREASE
IN HOUSING PER YEAR FROM WHAT
WE SEE NOW INTO PODIMATA
PERSPECTIVE.
>> YEAH NINETY SEVEN THOUSAND
WOULD BE MORE THAN WHAT NEW
YORK CITY IS CURRENTLY TRYING
TO ENABLE.
I THINK THERE'S AROUND EIGHTY
THOUSAND YOU MENTIONED THE
THRIFT SHOP AND I LIKE I JUST
WANT TO SHARE AN ANECDOTE IN
SOME CONVERSATION THAT HAPPENED
WITH THE PLANNING COMMISSION
THAT WAS RAISED AS AN EXAMPLE
OF HOW GREAT WOULD IT BE TO ADD
A BUNCH OF HOUSING THERE TO ADD
TO THE VIABILITY OF THAT
BUSINESS RIGHT.
AND ABSOLUTELY.
YOU KNOW, ROOFTOPS BRINGS
COMMERCIAL SUPPORT BUT YOU
DON'T GET THAT WITHOUT THE RISK
TO THAT BUILDING.
AND SO BUT TO BE CLEAR, WE WERE
WE'RE FOLLOWING PLANNING
COMMISSION DIRECTION AT THIS
POINT THERE ARE INFRASTRUCTURE
QUESTIONS THAT I THINK WE'LL
WE'LL HONESTLY HAVE TO BE VERY
ADDRESS VERY CLEARLY IN THE
PLAN BECAUSE WE WE DON'T WANT
TO CONVEY TO THE PUBLIC THIS IS
OUR VISION.
THIS IS OUR ZONE.
OH, SORRY.
IT TURNS OUT WE HAVE TO FIX
THIS PIPE BEFORE WE CAN SAY
YES.
SO WE GOT TO BE VERY CAREFUL
ABOUT THAT.
BUT BUT I THINK THAT'S THAT'S
PART OF THE TENSION I THINK
YES.
DEVELOPMENT NEXT DOOR TO THAT
THAT'S GREAT FOR THE THIRD SHOT
DEVELOPMENT ON THE PROPERTY
THAT THRIFT SHOP PROBABLY
DOESN'T RELOCATE IN THE CITY SO
THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS
,CAN YOU TALK A LITTLE BIT
MORE JUST ABOUT PROCESS MOVING
FORWARD?
>> I KNOW YOU STARTED THE
PRESENTATION WITH THAT BUT CAN
I KEEP COMING BACK TO THE THE
PEACE AROUND, YOU KNOW,
PLANNING COMMISSION DRAFTING
THIS AND YOU KNOW, AND THEN
IT'LL COME TO COUNCIL AND SOME
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
RECOMMENDATIONS.
I THINK YOU'RE HEARING SOME
THINGS TONIGHT THAT MIGHT
DIFFER A LITTLE BIT FROM SOME
SOME YOU KNOW, SOME AGREEMENT,
SOME SOME DIFFERENCES THERE.
HOW HOW DO YOU ANTICIPATE
INCORPORATING ADDITIONAL
FEEDBACK THAT YOU MIGHT RECEIVE
HERE AND OTHER PLACES INTO THAT
DRAFT PLAN?
AND THEN ONCE BECAUSE MY
UNDERSTANDING IS THAT WHEN THIS
PLAN COMES TO COUNCIL, THE THE
HOPE IS THAT IT'S IT'S SORT
OF A YES NO VOTE, NOT A MAGIC
WORDS.
SO SOME OF THE TIME LIKE SOME
OF THE TENSIONS HERE, WHETHER
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT LOW TO LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL, HOW
RESIDENTIAL IS INTEGRATED, PART
OF THAT IS ME AND THE PROJECT
TEAM BLURRING THE LINE BETWEEN
ZONING AND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
AND SO THERE ARE A LOT
OF OPINIONS AND WE'VE RECEIVED
A LOT OF OPINIONS FROM ALL THE
ENGAGEMENT THAT YOU'RE SEEING
THERE.
>> YOU KNOW, WE'RE MAKING SOME
GENERALIZATIONS 70 PERCENT
OF PEOPLE SUPPORT IT.
THERE'S A LOT OF DIVERSITY
OF OPINION IN THE CITY AND SO I
THINK THAT WE ARE GOING TO TRY
TO USE THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
TO FAITHFULLY RECOGNIZE THE
DIRECTION THAT WE HAVE AND SOME
OF THE QUESTIONS WE HAVE AND
HONESTLY AND WHAT THAT MEANS AT
TIMES IS THE COMP PLAN MIGHT
NOT ANSWER AS MANY OF THE
QUESTIONS AND LEAVE SOME OF IT
TO IMPLEMENTATION.
AND SO SO WE'RE GOING TO DO OUR
BEST TO DELIVER A PRODUCT TO
YOU AND THE PUBLIC AND THE
PLANNING COMMISSION THAT WE'RE
GOING TO SHARE WIDELY.
WE'RE GOING TO SOLICIT FEEDBACK
ON AND THEN WE'RE GOING TO GO
THROUGH THAT ADOPTION PROCESS
AS YOU ARTICULATE A PLANNING
COMMISSION ULTIMATELY IS GOING
TO ADOPT IT PRESENTED TO YOU.
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY THEN TO SAY YEP,
LET'S SHARE THIS WITH OUR
NEIGHBORS AND THE PUBLIC FOR
SORT OF FINAL COMMENT AND AT
THE CONCLUSION OF THAT PERIOD
IT'S GOING TO GO THROUGH ITS
FINAL ADOPTION AND SO I'M GOING
TO WORK WITH PEOPLE SMARTER
THAN ME TO FIND THE WAY TO
INCORPORATE AND ADDRESS
HONESTLY WHETHER IT'S AN
INFRASTRUCTURE CHALLENGE, THE
RIGHT SCALE OF DEVELOPMENT AND
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL TO
HOPEFULLY CONVEY A VISION THAT
EVERYBODY'S IN AGREEMENT AND
THEN WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
HAVE SOME HARD WORK ON THE
IMPLEMENTATION SIDE OF IT.
AND SO SO THE PLAN IS GOING TO
HOPEFULLY DESCRIBE AN ENDPOINT
BUT IT MIGHT NOT BE WITH THE
SPECIFICITY THAT SAYS BUILDINGS
HERE SHOULD BE THIRTY FIVE FEET
OR BUILDINGS HERE SHALL BE
FORTY EIGHT FEET.
BUT DESCRIBE FAITHFULLY WHAT
WE'VE HEARD AND THEN WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO GO TO WORK TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT THAT LOOKS LIKE
IN THE CODE .
DOES IT HOPE IT DOES FURTHER
QUESTIONS?
FOR MY PART I JUST WANT TO
OF COURSE THANK YOU ALL FOR THE
WORK THAT YOU'VE DONE ON THIS
PROJECT AND THOSE THOSE YOU
REPRESENT EVERYBODY I'D LIKE TO
THANK PLANNING COMMISSION WHO'S
DONE A GREAT DEAL OF WORK ON
THIS AND HAS PRETTY
CONSISTENTLY HEARD THIS
COUNCIL'S AND HEARD THE
COMMUNITY'S VOICE THAT YOU
KNOW, THAT WE WE DO HAVE A
HOUSING CRISIS SIMILAR ALONG
THOSE LINES.
BUT ALTHOUGH YOU KNOW, FOR MY
PART I AND YOU KNOW, TO FEED IN
ON THE HOUSE ON THE HOUSING
CRISIS AND THE NEED
TO ADDRESS
IT IS ALSO, YOU KNOW, ONE
OF THE CHALLENGES THAT WE HAVE
IN THE CITY AND SO I WANT TO,
YOU KNOW, CONTAIN THAT DUALITY,
DIVERSITY OF USE, DIVERSITY
OF IS IMPORTANT AND YOU KNOW,
THE BUSINESSES THAT WE HAVE ON
S INDUSTRIAL ON THEIR NATURE
WITHOUT REGARD TO THEIR THEIR
INDIVIDUAL MERITS.
THE NATURE OF THOSE BUSINESSES
IS IMPORTANT TO A COMMUNITY
THAT HAS A DIVERSITY OF USE,
HAS A DIVERSITY OF EMPLOYMENT.
SIMILARLY, THE UNIVERSITY DOES
HAVE GREAT PLANS AND RESOURCES
WITH RESPECT TO WHAT'S GOING ON
ON CAMPUS AND THE SPIN OFF
OF THAT IS UNKNOWN TO US.
BUT YOU KNOW BUT CAN PERHAPS WE
ANTICIPATED AND A COMMUNITY
AUGMENTED BY UNDERSTANDING THAT
SPIN OFF AND FURTHER AND
FINALLY FOR MY PART I'D LIKE TO
ECHO SOME THE CONCERNS THAT
HAVE CONCERN SOME OF THE
CAUTIONS THAT I'VE HEARD FROM
COLLEAGUES WITH RESPECT TO THE
THE COMMUNITY CONSENSUS THAT I
THINK WE'VE HEARD THROUGH THE
ENGAGEMENT PROCESS AND YOU
KNOW, WANTING TO TO MAKE SURE
THAT NOW THAT WE HAVE A PLAN
THAT CAN CAN ACCOMPLISH THAT
CONSENSUS ON THE ON THE INPUT
AND AND HOPEFULLY ON THE OUTPUT
BECAUSE THAT'S A THAT'S A
COMMON GOAL.
WE HAVE CHALLENGES.
WE NEED TO ALL BE YOU KNOW, ALL
BEING ON IN ORDER TO TO MEET
THEM.
THANKS.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
YOU BET.
IT IS NOW EIGHT THIRTY ARE MR.
DONIA DO YOU HAVE WORDS
OF WISDOM FOR US ONE WAY OR THE
OTHER?
I DON'T KNOW WHEN YOU STAND UP
I'M QUIET SO YOU KNOW I'M NOT
CHARLTON HESTON SO I DON'T KNOW
IF IT'S WISE OR NOT.
WE WON'T BE FINISHED IN FIFTEEN
MINUTES WITH SOLID WASTE.
I KNOW THERE'S A CUT OFF FOR
PUBLIC INPUT.
SO DO YOU WANT US TO START OR
WHAT DO YOU WANT TO SAY THAT
WHAT THAT WAS I WAS GOING TO
POSIT PERHAPS WE CAN HEAR THE
WE CAN HEAR THE PRESENTATION
PAUSE FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
OF PUBLIC COMMENT THERE B AND
THEN HAVE QUESTIONS THAT RUN
AROUND THE TABLE AS WE WISH AND
THEN WHEN THE NATURAL COURSE
OF THOSE QUESTIONS IS DONE SO
TOO WILL OUR TIME TOGETHER
.
NO
ALL RIGHT.
GOOD EVENING AND THANK YOU FOR
HAVING US.
WE'RE EXCITED FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SHARE WITH YOU
THE WORK THAT WE DO AND SOLID
WASTE.
I KNOW EVERYBODY'S EXCITED TO
HEAR ABOUT TRASH WHILE I HAVE
EXCHANGED EMAILS WITH MANY
OF YOU MOST OF US HAVE NOT MET
IN PERSON.
MY NAME IS ALLISON HEATLY AND I
AM YOUR SOLID WASTE MANAGER.
HERE WITH ME TONIGHT ARE SARAH
MASON, OUR RESOURCE
RECOVERY MANAGER.
SKYE STEWART PUBLIC SERVICE
CHIEF OF STAFF AND JORDAN
ROBERTS, OUR PUBLIC SERVICES
AREA ADMINISTRATOR.
>> KEVIN SCHNEIDER, OUR CREW
SUPERVISOR WAS NOT ABLE TO BE
WITH US TONIGHT DURING
TONIGHT'S PRESENTATION WE WILL
DISCUSS OUR OVERARCHING SERVICE
GOALS, PROVIDE A UNIT OVERVIEW
THAT INCLUDES OPERATIONS,
PROGRAMS AND EQUIPMENT AND
SHARE OUR CURRENT CHALLENGES
AND UPCOMING HORIZON ISSUES OUR
OVERARCHING GOAL IN SOLID WASTE
OUR OVERARCHING AND SOLID WASTE
IS TO PROVIDE SAFE AND
EFFICIENT SOLID WASTE SERVICES
AS WELL AS PROVIDE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR LANDFILL
DIVERSION FOR RESIDENTS AND
BUSINESSES IN ANN ARBOR TO
PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH AND THE
ENVIRONMENT.
WHEN WE SAY SAFE WE MEAN SAFETY
OF NOT JUST OUR OPERATORS BUT
EVERYONE AROUND US.
WHEN WE SAY EFFICIENT WE MEAN
HOW ARE WE GOING TO COST
EFFECTIVELY SERVICE ROUTES
WHILE MINIMIZING DISRUPTION FOR
CUSTOMERS AND REDUCING
CONFLICTS WITH OTHER MOTORISTS,
CYCLISTS AND PEDESTRIAN
WHENEVER AND WHEREVER POSSIBLE
WE ADDRESS WASTE REDUCTION BY
PROVIDING EDUCATION AND
ALTERNATIVES FOR WASTE
DIVERSION THROUGH VARIOUS
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES.
SOLID WASTE IS A UNIT OF THE
PUBLIC SERVICES AREA.
IT OVERSEES THE COLLECTION
OF TRASH ORGANIC AND RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS IN THE CITY WE'RE
PRIMARILY FUNDED THROUGH THE
SOLID WASTE MILLAGE WITH SOME
CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE CLIMATE
ACTION.
MILLICH SOLID WASTE IS ONE
OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
ACTIVITIES PROVIDED BY
MUNICIPALITIES.
WE ARE THE ONLY CITY SERVICE
THAT EVERY RESIDENT IN BUSINESS
INTERACTS WITH IN SOME WAY EACH
WEEK AND IT CAN OFTEN GO
UNNOTICED UNLESS SOMETHING GOES
WRONG.
WE'RE MADE UP OF 20 DRIVERS ONE
CREW SUPERVISOR, THREE PROGRAM
STAFF, ONE UNIT MANAGER AND A
HANDFUL OF TEMPORARY STAFF.
OUR CURRENT FLEET CONSISTS
OF 15 OWNED CITY TRUCKS, ONE
LONG TERM RENTAL SERVICING
NINETY FIVE UNIQUE COLLECTION
ROUTES EACH WEEK JUST COUNTING
CITY RESOURCES, SOLID WASTE
STAFF MAKE MORE THAN A MILLION
AND A HALF HOUSE CALLS EACH
YEAR.
OUR EQUIPMENT INCLUDES
AUTOMATED SIDEARM MOTORS WHICH
ARE PROBABLY THE MOST FAMILIAR
WITH THIS IS USED FOR
RESIDENTIAL TRASH AND ORGANIC'S
CAR COLLECTION FRONT LOADERS
USED FOR LARGER TRASH AND
RECYCLING DUMPSTERS AND REAR
LOADERS WHICH CAN SERVICE CARTS
AND SMALLER DUMPSTERS AND ARE
PRIMARILY USED IN OUR DOWNTOWN.
EACH OF THESE TRUCKS HAVE A
SPECIFIC PURPOSE AND FOR THE
MOST PART ARE NOT
INTERCHANGEABLE, NOT ALL THESE
TRUCK TYPES OPERATE IN ALL
AREAS OF THE CITY AND OUR GOAL
IS TO PLAN ROUTES FOR EACH
TRUCK TYPE TO SERVICE ALL
CUSTOMERS AS EFFICIENTLY AS
POSSIBLE BECAUSE OPERATIONS ARE
RELIANT ON STAFF AND EQUIPMENT
EVERY SINGLE DAY AND WASTE
COLLECTION AS A CORE SERVICE IT
CANNOT USUALLY BE RESCHEDULED.
IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT WE HAVE
ENOUGH TRUCKS AND ENOUGH STAFF
EACH DAY TO COMPLETE THE WORK
AND OFTEN THAT MEANS WE HAVE TO
BE FLEXIBLE AND NIMBLE IN OUR
DEPLOYMENT THROUGHOUT MOST
OF THE YEAR EVERY TRUCK IN THE
FLEET IS IN USE AT LEAST FIVE
DAYS A WEEK.
OUR FRONT LOAD TRUCKS ARE
HEAVILY UTILIZED SOMETIMES TEN
TO TWELVE HOURS A DAY.
WE EXPECT TO ADD A NEW FRONT
LOAD TRUCK AND A SPARE
AUTOMATED TRUCK SOMETIME THIS
YEAR TO HELP BETTER MANAGE OUR
EXISTING OUTS.
AND WHEN TRUCKS GO DOWN FOR
LONG PERIODS WE UTILIZE RENTAL
TRUCKS TO GET THE WORK DONE.
WHEN A TRUCK GOES OUT
OF SERVICE THE ROUTES STILL
NEED TO BE COMPLETED.
OUR DRIVERS MUST BE FLEXIBLE
WHETHER IT'S WORKING OVERTIME
TO COMPLETE THE ROUTES OR
DRIVING DIFFERENT EQUIPMENT
THROUGHOUT THE DAY.
WE'RE FORTUNATE TO HAVE
EXPERIENCED STAFF WHO CAN BE
NIMBLE AND PROVIDE COVERAGE
WHEN OUR SHORT ON STAFF OR ON
EQUIPMENT SEASONAL PEAKS HAVE
ALSO BEEN A CHALLENGE PASSED
LEAF SEASONS HAVE RESULTED IN
LONG DAYS LEADING TO INJURIES
SIGNIFICANT OTTI AND TEMPORARY
BURNOUT.
IMPLEMENTING OUR RECENT BAG
SETOUT LIMITS AND HIRING
SEASONAL STAFF HAVE HELPED TO
MITIGATE THESE ISSUES AND
STAFFING IS ALWAYS AN ISSUE IT
SEEMS WE'RE ALWAYS HIRING AND
THE CDL REQUIREMENT CAN BE AN
OBSTACLE.
>> GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO BE HERE.
I'M SARAH MASON, YOUR RESOURCE
RECOVERY MANAGER.
ALLISON HAS GIVEN YOU ALL A
GOOD OVERVIEW OF THE DIRECT
SERVICES WE PROVIDE WITH CITY
TRUCKS AND CREWS.
THE UNIT IS ALSO RESPONSIBLE
FOR CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION FOR
ALL SOLID WASTE RELATED
SERVICES.
THESE CONTRACTS INCLUDE
OPERATIONS FOR OUR SOLID WASTE
FACILITIES SUCH AS THE CITY
OWNED TRANSFER STATION.
OUR TRASH IS TAKEN TO BE
CONSOLIDATED BEFORE TRANSFERRED
TO THE LANDFILL FOR DISPOSAL,
THE CITY'S COMPOST FACILITY AND
THE LEAST MATERIAL
RECOVERY FACILITY.
WE ALSO MANAGE CONTRACTS FOR
EDUCATION AND OUTREACH THAT
SUPPORTS ALL OF OUR PROGRAMS
AND ENCOURAGES WASTE REDUCTION.
WE ALSO CONTRACTS FOR
ADDITIONAL COLLECTION SERVICES
SUCH AS COMMERCIAL REFUSE
CONTRACT WITH W.M. AND CURBSIDE
RECYCLING COLLECTIONS WITH
RECYCLING AFTER OUR PROGRAM
STAFF WHO BY THE WAY VERY PROUD
TO WORK WITH OUR EXTREMELY
DEDICATED TO DAILY PROBLEM
SOLVING AND RESOLUTION FINDING
FOR THE RESIDENTS AND
BUSINESSES OF ANN ARBOR.
THEY WORK TO PROVIDE SUPPORT
FOR OUR OPERATIONS AND NEW
PROGRAMS TO MEET OUR WASTE
REDUCTION IN CIRCULAR ECONOMY
CALLS.
OUR TEAM WORKS CLOSELY WITH
BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL
PARTNERS SUCH AS CITY
COMMUNICATIONS, SUSTAINABILITY
COMMUNITY STANDARDS, THE COUNTY
THE UNIVERSITY DENHA DOWNTOWN
BUSINESS DISTRICTS TO ACHIEVE
THE GOALS OUTLINED IN THE SOLID
WASTE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN
APPROVED BY COUNCIL AND THE TWO
ZERO CLIMATE ACTION PLAN AROUND
REDUCING OVERALL WASTE
GENERATED AND THEN MANAGING
WHAT WASTE IS PRODUCED IN THE
MOST RESPONSIBLE METHOD
AVAILABLE DOWNTOWN IS AN AREA
WHERE THERE ARE SPECIFIC UNIQUE
CHALLENGES TO PROVIDING SOLID
WASTE SERVICES DUE TO LIMITED
SPACE FOR CONTAINERS.
THE NEED FOR MANY SHARED
CONTAINERS AND THEN JUST THE
GENERAL AMOUNT OF TRAFFIC IN
TERMS OF PEDESTRIAN CYCLING
MOTORIST AND AS THE DAY GETS
BUSIER IT GETS MUCH HARDER TO
GET IN AND OUT.
SO AS I MENTIONED PREVIOUSLY,
WE'VE WORKED VERY HARD TO BE
RESPONSIVE TO CONCERNS AND
NEEDS OF OUR CUSTOMERS AND AS
DOWNTOWN IS A FOCAL POINT FOR
THE CITY, IT'S BEEN AN AREA
WHERE WE'VE MADE SOME
CONCENTRATED CHANGES AND
INCREASED SERVICES TO MEET THE
DEMAND OVER THE PAST TWO YEARS
WE'VE INCREASED TRASH
COLLECTION TO SEVEN DAYS A
WEEK, THEREBY ELIMINATING A
LONG GAP BETWEEN SAY A BUSY
SATURDAY AND A MONDAY MORNING
COLLECTION.
THEY'VE ALSO INCREASED
RECYCLING COLLECTION TO SIX
DAYS A WEEK.
WE HAVE DONE MANY IN-PERSON
MEETINGS BRINGING ALL THE
CUSTOMERS TOGETHER PROPERTY
OWNERS TO TRY AND RESOLVE
ISSUES AROUND SHARED
CONTAINERS.
SOMETIMES THAT INVOLVES THE
FREQUENCY, THE SCHEDULE, ACCESS
AND JUST GENERAL RESPONSIBILITY
FOR CLEANING UP THE AREA.
STAFF WORKED CLOSELY
WITH
COMMUNITY STANDARDS TO DO
INSPECTIONS AND THEN FOLLOW UP
WITH CUSTOMERS WHEN THERE'S
ISSUES TO TRY AND GET THEM
RESOLVED.
WE'VE RELOCATED CONTAINERS
NECESSARY AND THEN WE'VE WORKED
TO IMPROVE THE EFFICIENCY
OF COLLECTION BY REDUCING JUST
THE NUMBER OF CONTAINERS THAT
YOU SEE BY TRANSITIONING SOME
OF THE RECYCLE CARTS TO SMALLER
TWO YARD DUMPSTERS.
THIS HELPS ALSO MAKE ROOM FOR
FUTURE SERVICES AS WE LOOK TO
ADD SAY COMMERCIAL COMPOST
COLLECTION IN THE FUTURE.
AND THEN FINALLY WE WORKED WITH
W.M. OUR FRANCHISE HORLER FOR
COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS TO MAKE
SURE THAT CUSTOMERS WERE PAYING
FOR THEIR APPROPRIATE SERVICE
TO ESTABLISH GREATER
ACCOUNTABILITY.
IN ADDITION TO SOME OF THE
UNIQUE CHALLENGES I MENTIONED
IN DOWNTOWN, WE ALSO WANT TO
SPEND SOME TIME DISCUSSING A
FEW AREAS WHERE WE ENCOUNTER
ENCOUNTER CHALLENGES TO WHAT WE
DO THROUGHOUT THE CITY.
THESE AREAS BROADLY INCLUDE
MEETING THE DEMAND FOR NEW AND
EXPANDED SERVICES AS MORE
CUSTOMERS COME ONLINE, VOLUMES
INCREASE AND WE EXPAND SERVICES
TO MEET OUR GOALS.
THIS ALSO INCLUDES THINKING
ABOUT HOW WE MODIFY OUR
SERVICES AS THEIR CHANGING ROAD
CONFIGURATIONS ACROSS THE CITY
AS WE ADD BICYCLE
INFRASTRUCTURE, AS WE CHANGE
THE TYPE AND AMOUNT
OF DEVELOPMENT WE HAVE, WE HAVE
TO MODIFY AND BE FLEXIBLE TO BE
RESPONSIVE TO THAT.
THIS INCLUDES HOW WE PROVIDE
SERVICE AND HOW WE COMMUNICATE
THOSE SERVICES TO OUR CUSTOMERS
.
IN ADDITION WE LOOK FOR HOW WE
CAN CONTINUE TO PROVIDE SAFE
AND EFFICIENT COLLECTION AS WE
GROW AND DENSIFY INTO THE
FUTURE.
>> I'LL SPEAK BRIEFLY ABOUT THE
DEMAND FOR NEW AND EXPANDED
SERVICES.
THE THINGS THAT YOU SEE LISTED
HERE THE DEMAND FOR INCREASED
FREQUENCY AND RECYCLING FOR
COMMERCIAL COMMERCIAL AND
MULTIFAMILY ORGANICS COLLECTION
AND BULK WASTE WERE ALL THINGS
THAT WERE IN THE SOLID WASTE
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN AND
THEY ARE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
GROWTH IN OUR SERVICES WHEN WE
THINK ABOUT THE DEMAND FOR
INCREASED FREQUENCY OF SERVICE,
A GOOD EXAMPLE AS NEEDING TO
INCREASE SERVICE FOR RECYCLING
COLLECTION.
WE HAVE A LOT OF COMMERCIAL
CUSTOMERS THAT WE SEE THAT
COULD UTILIZE MORE CAPACITY IN
LARGE PART BECAUSE THEY HAVE A
LARGER AMOUNT OF CARDBOARD
GENERATED THAT OFTEN DOESN'T
GET BROKEN DOWN APPROPRIATELY
AND IT LEADS TO AN OVERFLOWING
DUMPSTER.
SO WE'VE BEEN EXPLORING THE
OPTION OF MAYBE WE COULD
INSTALL COMPACTORS IN SOME
PLACES INSTEAD TO BETTER
RECOVER THAT GOOD CLEAN
CARDBOARD FOR RECYCLING FOOD
SCRAP COLLECTION IS SOMETHING
THAT'S LONG BEEN AVAILABLE TO
OUR SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE.
THEY CAN PUT IN THEIR COMPOST
CART AT THE CURB.
HOWEVER AT PRESENT IT'S NOT
REALLY AVAILABLE FOR
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTS IN A
VERY CONVENIENT WAY.
SO WE'VE BEEN WORKING IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH OSSI TO
ESTABLISH A NETWORK FOR FOOD
SCRAP DROP OFF LOCATIONS THAT
OUR MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTS COULD
USE IN ORDER TO COLLECT THAT
MATERIAL AND THEN SEND IT TO
THE COMPOST SITE.
THIS IS IN PART BEING FUNDED
THROUGH THE CLIMATE VILLAGE.
FINALLY BOKI WASTE COLLECTION
IS SOMETHING THAT'S NOT
CURRENTLY OFFERED AT THE CURB
FOR RESIDENTS.
THE PICTURE THAT YOU SEE HAS A
COUCH NO A MATTRESS IN IT.
THESE THINGS DO PILE UP
ESPECIALLY DURING TIMES OF HIGH
TURNOVER AND WHILE WE HAVE
OPTIONS FOR A DROP OFF TO GET
RID OF THESE ITEMS, WE
RECOGNIZE THAT THAT MIGHT NOT
BE THE MOST ACCESSIBLE OR
EQUITABLE OPTION AS NOT
EVERYONE HAS A VEHICLE TO MOVE
SOMETHING OR THEY MAY NOT HAVE
THE APPROPRIATE VEHICLE TO HAUL
WHAT THEY NEED AT ALL.
SO WE DO HAVE PRICING UNDER OUR
CONTRACT WITH THEM TO PROVIDE
THIS SERVICE TO OUR RESIDENTIAL
CUSTOMERS AND IT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE'RE EXPLORING.
WE'VE ALSO BEEN WORKING WITH A
COALITION OF COMMUNITY PARTNERS
IN AN EFFORT CALLED MOVE OUT IN
ARBOR TO SEE WHAT WE CAN DO TO
BETTER COVER ITEMS IN GOOD USE
FOR REUSE DURING HIGH TIMES
OF STUDENT TURNOVER IN RECENT
YEARS THE NEW BIKE
INFRASTRUCTURE HAS EMERGED TO
MEET OUR COMMUNITIES TRAFFIC
CALMING NONVOTER SAFETY AND
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION
GOALS.
SOME OF THESE NO NEW
RECONFIGURATIONS HAVE PRESENTED
SOME CHALLENGES TO SERVICE AND
SOLID, I SAID AS VARYING TYPES
OF BIKE FACILITIES WE'RE
DESIGNING STRUCTURED.
WE LEARNED SOMETIMES THE HARD
WAY THAT MODIFICATIONS NEEDED
TO BE MADE TO SERVICE CAR
PARTS.
THERE HAVE BEEN CHALLENGES WITH
THE AUTOMATED ARM REACHING
ACROSS THE BIKE LANES TO REACH
KARTS ONLINE EXTENSIONS THERE
HAVE ALSO BEEN INSTANCES WHERE
OUR EQUIPMENT HAS BEEN IN
CONFLICT WITH A LOT OF THE
VERTICAL INDICATORS THAT ARE
USED IN SOME OF OUR PUFFER BIKE
LANES.
THESE TRUCKS ARE THIRTY FOUR TO
THIRTY SIX FEET LONG AND SO
THEY'RE CHALLENGING TO MOVER
MANEUVER IN AND OUT AND AROUND
DELINEATOR IS TO SAFELY SERVICE
CARTS SO OF COURSE WE MUST
CONTINUE TO PROVIDE THE SOLID
WASTE SERVICE BUT HOW BEST TO
DO IT SAFELY AND EFFICIENTLY
WILL DEPEND ON THE TYPE
OF INSTALLATION AND HOW MUCH
ROOM IS AVAILABLE BETWEEN THE
CURB LINES.
TO THAT END SOLID WASTE IS
CONTINUING TO COLLABORATE AND
COORDINATE WITH FOLKS AND
ENGINEERING AND TRANSPORTATION
TO ENSURE THAT NEW BUILDS
INCLUDE SOLID WASTE FUNCTION IN
THE DESIGNS PROVIDING SPACE IN
THE BUFFER ZONE FOR CARS OR
PROVIDING OPENINGS AND THE
TREATMENTS TO ALLOW TRUCKS TO
SERVE AS CARS PLACED AT THE
CURB LINE EXTENSION WIN
PLACEMENT IN THE BUFFER ZONE IS
NOT POSSIBLE.
COMMUNICATE TO RESIDENTS ABOUT
WHERE TO PLACE THE CARS HAS
ALSO BEEN AN ONGOING EFFORT AND
AS PLACEMENT LOCATIONS DO
DIFFER BASED ON THE ROAD WIDTH
AND TREATMENT TYPE THERE ARE
EXAMPLES WE'VE INCLUDED A FEW
EXAMPLES HERE OF THE VARIOUS
SORT OF SITE SPECIFIC PUBLIC
EDUCATION MATERIALS WE'VE
CREATED TO HELP RESIDENTS
UNDERSTAND WHERE TO PUT THEIR
CAR SO THEY CAN SAFELY BE
SERVICED.
AND ANOTHER CHALLENGE IS
PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE,
ADAPTING ADAPTING OUR SERVICE
TO CONTINUE TO BE ABLE TO
PROVIDE SAFE AND EFFICIENT
SERVICE AS THE CITY GROWS
INTENSIFIES.
WE'VE JUST HEARD AN UPDATE FROM
THE PLANNING TEAM THAT ARE
WORKING ON THE CITY'S
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
WITH GROWTH GOALS FOR THE TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF NEW RESIDENTS
AND ALL OF THOSE FUTURE
RESIDENTS WILL GENERATE WASTE.
SOLID WASTE IS PLANNING NOW TO
ENSURE WE CAN SAFELY AND
EFFICIENTLY COLLECT FROM NEW
DEVELOPMENTS, MANY OF WHICH ARE
GOING TO BE HIGHER DENSITY
MULTIFAMILY OR MIXED USE STAFF
REVIEW SITE PLANS TO ENSURE
SOLID WASTE CAN BE SERVICED
SAFELY AND EFFICIENTLY ONCE
THOSE BUILDINGS ARE OCCUPIED.
CONSOLIDATED SERVICE POINTS ARE
COMMONPLACE AND DENSER
DEVELOPMENTS DUE TO LIMITED
SPACE AND EFFICIENCY.
FOR EXAMPLE, THINK OF LIKE A
SHARED MAIL ROOM OR A CLUSTER
CENTRALIZED CLUSTER MAILBOXES
THOSE ARE STANDARD AND LOTS
OF MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENTS.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION CAN BE A
DIFFERENT TYPE CONSOLIDATED
SERVICE POINT IN MULTIFAMILY
DEVELOPMENT THEY ALREADY EXIST
IN MANY LOCATIONS IN ANN ARBOR
AND ARE COMMON ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
WHILE WE UNDERSTAND SOME
PROJECTS AND DEVELOPMENTS WOULD
PREFER TO HAVE INDIVIDUAL CURB
CART SERVICE, URBAN DENSITY IS
NOT ALWAYS COMPATIBLE WITH
SUBURBAN STYLE TRASH COLLECTION
OR DWELLINGS GET THEIR OWN
TRASH RECYCLING ORGANICS CARS
FOR THEIR EXCLUSIVE USE ON THIS
SLIDE WE HAVE AN EXAMPLE
OF WHERE CONSOLIDATED SERVICES
HAPPENING TODAY.
THIS IS A VERDIAN S THIS IS
FROM A PAGE FROM THE SITE PLAN
FOR THE SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
PLAN AND SO THIS IS A
MULTIFAMILY NEIGHBORHOOD OWNER
OCCUPIED HOMES AND CONDOS AND
IT'S AN EXAMPLE OF CONSOLIDATED
SERVICE POINTS HIGHLIGHTING THE
HIGHLIGHTING JUST TO MAKE IT A
LITTLE BIT CLEARER, YOU CAN SEE
THAT THEY HAVE MODELED THE
TURNING MOVEMENTS OF DIFFERENT
TRUCKS TO SHOW THAT THEY CAN
ACCESS A FEWER NUMBER
OF POINTS.
THEY'RE NOT PICKING UP EVERY
SINGLE DRIVEWAY BUT THAT WILL
ALLOW THEM TO MAKE FEWER STOPS,
BE LESS DISRUPTIVE THAN GARBAGE
TRUCKS CAN GET TO GET IN AND
OUT OF THIS NEIGHBORHOOD MORE
QUICKLY.
SO WHAT DO WE DO WHEN WE
EVALUATE SERVICEABILITY A
PROPOSED SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT
SO THESE NEWER DEVELOPMENTS ARE
ALREADY COMING IN.
WE'RE ALREADY THINKING ABOUT
THEM AND THERE WILL BE MORE
INTERIOR TRYING TO MAKE SURE WE
HAVE CLEAR EXPECTATIONS ABOUT
WHAT WE CAN AND CAN'T DO WITH
THE EQUIPMENT AND STAFFING THAT
WE HAVE.
SO WHAT DO WE DO WHEN WE REVIEW
THINGS?
WE ARE LOOKING AT EACH PROPOSED
DEVELOPMENT INDIVIDUALLY TO
DETERMINE IF THE PROPOSED
DEVELOPMENT CAN BE SERVICED
SAFELY AND EFFICIENTLY WEEK
OVER WEEK AND ALL WEATHER
CONDITIONS NOT ON JUST THE BEST
DAY IS WHEN EVERYBODY DOES
EVERYTHING RIGHT WITH THE
EXISTING EQUIPMENT AND STAFFING
THAT WE HAVE.
WE ASKED THEM TO PROVIDE SOLID
WASTE GENERATION CALCULATIONS
BASED ON THE TYPE OF PROPOSED
USES AND WE LOOK AT THOSE TO
MAKE SURE THEY'RE ADEQUATE AND
APPROPRIATE.
THAT MEANS IS THERE ENOUGH
CAPACITY TO PROVIDE NOT TO HAVE
TO REQUIRE THAT SITE TO BE
SERVICED EVERY DAY.
SO WE LOOK AT THE NUMBER AND
THE SIZE OF THE USE OF THE
CONTAINERS AND MAKING SURE
THEY'RE APPROPRIATE.
WE'RE ALSO LOOKING AT THE
STORAGE LOCATIONS, THE SERVICE
LOCATION AND THE SOLID WASTE
SERVICE PATH OF THOSE THOSE
THIRTY FOUR TO THIRTY SIX FEET
LONG TRUCKS WILL NEED TO USE TO
ACCESS THESE SPACES.
WE'RE LOOKING AT VEHICLE
CLEARANCE, THOSE TURNING TRUCK
MOVEMENTS AND BACK UP DISTANCES
WE WE TRY TO MINIMIZE THE
BACKUP DISTANCES BECAUSE OF THE
RISK TO MOTORISTS AND
PEDESTRIANS AND CYCLISTS AND
BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES AND ALSO
OTHER ALL SORTS OF OTHER THINGS
IN THE PUBLIC ARENA.
AND WE ALSO WANT TO MAKE SURE
THE PROPOSED PLAN REFLECTS
HUMAN BEHAVIOR AGAIN, PEOPLE
CAN DO THINGS RIGHT ONE TIME OR
TWO TIMES BUT THERE'S ALSO A
LOT OF DEMANDS ON PEOPLE'S TIME
AND ENERGY AND THEY CAN'T
ALWAYS CARTS IN THE RIGHT PLACE
PREDICTABLY OR PEOPLE TURN OVER
AND THERE'S NOT IT DOESN'T
ALWAYS HAPPEN.
AND SO AGAIN WE WANT TO DO THE
BEST WE WANT TO AGAIN MAKE SURE
THAT THERE IS THE SPACE NEEDED
FOR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
BECAUSE IT'S A FACT OF LIFE
NOBODY WANTS TO TO TAKE
VALUABLE REAL ESTATE AND PUT IT
ASIDE FOR SOLID WASTE.
>> BUT IT IS SOMETHING THAT WE
HAVE TO PLAN FOR.
AND SO HERE'S AN EXAMPLE
ANOTHER EXAMPLE WE'VE BEEN
PULLING STRAIGHT FROM OUR OUR
PLAN REVIEW SOFTWARE.
HERE'S AN EXAMPLE OF A CURRENT
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN THAT'S
SHOWING BOTH DUMPSTER
ENCLOSURES AND TRASH ROOMS.
THEY'RE SHOWING THE TURNING
RADIUS AND THEY'RE SHOWING THE
BACKUP DISTANCES TO SHOW THAT
HOW THIS WOULD BE SAFELY
SERVICED AND WOULD MAKE SURE
THAT THESE TRUCKS ARE NOT
BACKING STRAIGHT INTO A BACKING
UP INTO A MAJOR STREET, FOR
INSTANCE.
AND SO THESE TWO DIFFERENT
SERVICING TYPES ON THE SAME
SITE BOTH CAN WORK.
AND SO THIS IS A CONSOLIDATED
SERVICE POINT THAT WE THINK
WILL WORK WELL IN A LOT OF OUR
MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENTS.
BUT WE DO KNOW THAT IT CAN SEEM
CONFUSING BECAUSE SOME
MULTIFAMILY
DEVELOPMENTS IN ANN
ARBOR HAVE CARTE SERVICE AND
OTHERS HAVE DUMPSTERS SERVICE.
AND SO WE WANT TO SHOW YOU A
COUPLE OF EXAMPLES TO SHOW YOU
WHY AND EXPLAIN WHY THAT IS.
HERE'S A CONCEPTUAL LAYOUT OF A
MULTIFAMILY NEIGHBORHOOD
PROPOSED NEAR ELSWORTH.
IT'S A PRIVATE ROAD AS DESIGNED
BUT IT FUNCTIONS AND KIND
OF LOOKS LIKE A PUBLIC STREET.
THERE'S COLOURBLIND WE FEEL
LIKE AN AUTOMATED TRUCK COULD
EASILY SERVICE EACH OF THESE
DWELLINGS BASED ON THE SITE
LAYOUT.
THERE APPEARS TO BE SUFFICIENT
FRONTAGE FOR TRASH AND
RECYCLING SERVICE.
THERE'S REASONABLE ROOM FOR THE
TINY MOVEMENTS AND WON'T
REQUIRE THE DRIVER TO BACK UP
SIGNIFICANT DISTANCES OR ONTO A
MAJOR PUBLIC ROAD.
STAFF WOULD BE SUPPORTIVE OF A
CART OR A DUMPSTER SERVICING
AND THIS MULTIFAMILY
DEVELOPMENT BECAUSE OF THE SITE
CONDITIONS.
HERE'S A DIFFERENT STYLE ABOUT
THE SAME SIZE ABOUT THE SAME
NUMBER OF UNITS WITH A
DIFFERENT TYPE OF LAYOUT.
A PAVED AREA HERE IS MORE AKIN
TO A PARKING LOT THAN A PUBLIC
OR PRIVATE ROAD.
IT WOULD BE HARDER TO SERVICE
EFFICIENTLY WITH AUTOMATED
ARMED VEHICLE.
>> YEAH LASER A HERE.
ALL RIGHT.
SO SERVET TRYING TO SERVICE AT
A DRIVEWAY OR AT A GARAGE WOULD
REQUIRE BACKING UP DISTANCES.
THERE'S NO SPACE TO TURN AROUND
WOULD REQUIRE MANY STOPS THAT
COULD BLOCK IN PEOPLE WHO ARE
TRYING TO GET IN AND OUT
OF THEIR HOMES.
IT'S JUST A MORE CHALLENGING
SPACE JUST BECAUSE OF THE
CONSTRAINTS AND SO WE ALSO
DON'T THINK THERE'S A
SIGNIFICANT SUFFICIENT FRONTAGE
FOR ABOUT ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
CARTS WHICH WOULD BE NEEDED FOR
US FOR RECYCLING AND FOR TRASH.
SO WE THINK A CONSOLIDATED
COLLECTION POINT OR A SHARED
DUMPSTER IS A MUCH SAFER AND
MORE EFFICIENT OPTION WHERE THE
TRUCK CAN ENTER IN DIRECTLY
SERVICE AT A COLLECTION POINT
BACK UP HERE AND THEN GO OUT
FOR FACING BACK TO A MAJOR ROAD
.
WE ARE NOT TRYING TO BE A
ROADBLOCK.
OUR GOAL IS TO ULTIMATELY
REDUCE FUTURE HEADACHES FOR OUR
FUTURE RESIDENTS HOW WE'RE
LIVING IN THESE DEVELOPMENTS
OUR CONTRACTORS WHO HAVE TO
SERVICE THEM AND ALSO OUR
DRIVERS WHO HAVE TO SERVICE
SKYS WALKED YOU THROUGH
DIFFERENT MULTI-FAMILY
DEVELOPMENT LAYOUTS INCLUDING
ONE THAT IS NEWLY CONSTRUCTED
AND FUNCTIONING WELL.
SOME OF YOU MAY BE FAMILIAR
WITH THIS TOWN HOME DEVELOPMENT
NIELSON'S SQUARE CONSTRUCTION
EARLY 2000S AS YOU CAN SEE FROM
THE AERIAL THE SITES DRIVEWAY
CONFIGURATION LOOKS LIKE IT
WOULD BE SAFE AND EFFICIENT TO
SERVICE THE AUTOMATED SIDE ARM
TRUCKS IF RESIDENTS
APPROPRIATELY SPACE THEIR CARDS
IN FRONT OF THEIR GARAGES.
FUNCTIONALLY THIS BEHAVIOR DOES
NOT HAPPEN.
GARAGES ARE IMMEDIATELY
ADJACENT TO EACH OTHER
REQUIRING RESIDENTS USING A
VEHICLE TO EXIT THEIR CAR IN
THE DRIVE WHILE TO PROPERLY SET
OUT CARS.
SAME THING AT THE END OF THE
DAY THE RESIDENTS HAVE TO EXIT
THEIR CAR TO MOVE THE CARTS TO
ACCESS THE GARAGE.
IT'S THE PHOTO ON THE RIGHT
SHOWS NEITHER OF THESE CARTS
CAN BE SERVICED WITH THE
AUTOMATED TRUCK UNLESS THE
DRIVER WERE TO PULL THEM BY
HAND ANTITHETICAL TO THE
AUTOMATED SERVICE APPROACH, THE
RESIDENTS IN THIS ASSOCIATION
WANT TO REPLACE THEIR CARTS FOR
DUMPSTERS BUT THERE'S LITTLE
ROOM AVAILABLE AND THOSE
LOCATIONS IDENTIFIED FOR
DUMPSTER PLACEMENT WOULD
REQUIRE A SITE PLAN.
WE HAVE A SIMILAR FROM CLOVELLY
VILLAGE EXPERIENCING THE SAME
ISSUES.
WE'VE SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED
CONVERSIONS IN THE LAST FEW
YEARS IN BOTH LOCATION AND
LOCATIONS BOTH RESIDENTIAL AND
COMMERCIAL SKYJACKINGS
GIVING
FORETHOUGHT TO HOW WE WILL
SERVICE THESE NEW DENSER
DEVELOPMENTS THAT WILL SAVE
FUTURE SERVICING HEADACHES
PARTICULARLY IN OUR DOWNTOWN.
WE LACK ALLEYS OR OTHER SPACE
FOR ACCESS AND STORAGE.
WE ENCOUNTER BICH FACILITIES IN
VARIOUS FORMS AND WE'RE ALWAYS
LOOKING TO MINIMIZE CONFLICTS
WITH PEDESTRIAN BICYCLISTS AND
VEHICLES WHENEVER AND WHEREVER
POSSIBLE.
THESE ARE EXAMPLES OF TWO
RECENTLY REVIEWED SITE PLANS IN
THE SOUTH UNIVERSITY AREA WHERE
STAFF WORK WITH THE DEVELOPERS
AND DESIGN TEAMS TO COME UP
WITH A PLAN THAT WHILE NOT
IDEAL WE FEEL IS SERVICEABLE
GIVEN THE DIFFERENT SPACE
CONSTRAINTS THE ONE THERE TO
THE BOTTOM LEFT WILL IT'S IT'S
ACCESSING BETWEEN CHURCH AND S
FOREST AND WE'LL BE PULLING IN
AND PULLING OUT AND SERVICING
MULTIPLE DUMPSTERS ALL AT THE
SAME TIME.
BUT IT WILL WORK WE WE CAN WE
HAVE THE TURNING MOVEMENT'S
MODEL AND WE FEEL THIS WILL
WORK.
THE ONE THERE TO THE RIGHT IS
OFF OF THE UNIVERSITY JUST TO
THE NORTH AND WE WILL PULL IN
ICE DUMPSTER AND THEY
PROVIDED A LOCATION FOR THE
TRUCK TO TURN AROUND AND EXIT
FORWARD FACING
FINALLY WE
WANTED TO BRING TO YOUR
ATTENTION A FEW ITEMS THAT ARE
GOING TO BE COMING UP IN THE
NEXT SEVERAL MONTHS.
WE'LL BE LOOKING TO REVISE THE
ORDINANCE AROUND OURS FOR
COLLECTION TO ALLOW MORE
EFFICIENT SERVICE.
WE REALLY NEED TO BE ABLE TO
GET IN AND OUT OF DOWNTOWN AND
OTHER DENSE AREAS AS EARLY AS
POSSIBLE TO HELP REDUCE
CONFLICTS WITH CYCLISTS,
PEDESTRIANS, DELIVERY TRUCKS,
MOTORIST AND TO MAXIMIZE OUR
ROAD EFFICIENCY.
SECOND HERE THE SOLID WASTE
REGULATIONS WHICH IS THE RULES
DOCUMENT TO COMPLEMENT THE
SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE LAST HAD
A MAJOR REVISION IN 2011
COUNCIL DID A VERY RECENT
UPDATE ADDRESSING CARTS AND
BIKE LANE SPECIFICALLY BUT THE
WHOLE DOCUMENT IS A LITTLE OUT
OF DATE WITH OUR CURRENT
PRACTICES SO A MORE A MORE
ROBUST REVISION OF THAT IS
COMING UP SOON.
WE'RE ALSO LOOKING TO FINALIZE
OUR ROUTE OPTIMIZATION PROJECT.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE HAD
IN OUR BUDGET FOR THIS FISCAL
YEAR AS AN IMPACT AND WE'VE
BEEN WORKING TO GET IT
COMPLETE.
WE'RE LOOKING TO CONTRACT WITH
A COMPANY TO GET THAT
IMPLEMENTED AND WE HOPEFULLY
WILL BE USING OUR PRODUCT TO
GATHER VERY DETAILED DATA ABOUT
OUR COLLECTIONS SO THAT WE CAN
FEED THAT INTO AN OPTIMIZATION
MODEL AND REBALANCE OUR ROUTES.
THIS OPTIMIZATION IS NOT ONLY
TO MAKE OUR COLLECTIONS
EFFICIENT TODAY BUT ALSO TO
PROVIDE A MODEL FOR WHAT
RESOURCES WILL BE NEEDED AS THE
CITY GROWS.
ADDITIONALLY, I MENTIONED
EARLIER THAT WE'RE LOOKING AT
DEVELOPING AND EXPANDING A OFF
NETWORK FOR FOOD SCRAP TO SERVE
THE MORE THAN HALF OF OUR
RESIDENTS THAT LIVE IN
MULTI-FAMILY PROPERTIES AND
ALLOW THEM ACCESS TO THAT
SERVICE.
LASTLY, WE'LL BE COMING FORWARD
WITH FLEET REPLACEMENT REQUESTS
TO REPLACE EQUIPMENT AND ADD
TRUCKS TO THE FLEET.
>> ALL RIGHT.
AND I WOULD LIKE TO CLOSE THIS
OUT BY SAYING THANK YOU VERY
MUCH FOR YOUR TIME AND
ATTENTION THIS EVENING.
WE ENJOYED GETTING TO SHARE A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT WHAT WE DO
EVERY DAY AND WE'D ALSO LIKE TO
EXTEND AN OPEN INVITATION TO
YOU.
YOU ARE MORE THAN WELCOME TO
COME OUT TO THE WHEELER SERVICE
CENTER AT ANY TIME.
COME ON A RIDE ALONG WITH US
ROUTE START EARLY FIVE THIRTY
SIX A.M. START TIME BUT THERE'S
NO BETTER WAY TO SEE THE SKILL
AND THE TECHNIQUE AND
EVERYTHING THAT OUR STAFF DO
THAN GETTING OUT AND DOING IT
WITH THEM.
THEY DO A VERY, VERY GOOD JOB.
AS ALISON MENTIONED, SOLID
WASTE IS ONE OF THOSE THINGS
THAT AS LONG AS IT'S WORKING,
AS LONG AS IT'S SEAMLESS YOU
DON'T REALLY NOTICE THAT IT'S
HAPPENING AND WE'RE FORTUNATE
THAT THAT IS THE CASE FOR US A
MAJORITY OF THE TIME WE HAVE A
GREAT TEAM WE LOVE TO HAVE YOU
OUT TO THANK YOU AGAIN VERY
MUCH FOR YOUR TIME AND WE'LL
TAKE ANY QUESTIONS.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
NOW ONE OF THE SO ONE OF IT'S
GREAT HAVING INSTITUTIONAL
KNOWLEDGE BUT ONE OF THE
PROBLEMS WITH INSTITUTIONAL
KNOWLEDGE IS THAT YOU HAVE
INSTITUTIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND
WHEN THE MARCH OF PROGRESS OR
TAKES THAT KNOWLEDGE, SOMETIMES
YOU FAIL TO RECOLLECT THAT THAT
PROGRESS HAS OCCURRED.
THIS IS WITH RESPECT TO OUR
EIGHT TWENTY EIGHT FORTY FIVE
PUBLIC COMMENT BEGINNING TIME
TURNS OUT THAT WAS A RULE WE'VE
CHANGED ALREADY SO IT IS NO
LONGER OUR COMMENT RULE AND SO
GUESS WHAT LET'S LET'S ROLL
WITH QUESTIONS FROM FROM
COUNCIL MEMBERS AND THEN WE
WILL TAKE PUBLIC COMMENT AS WE
WILL ON THE BACK END COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
RICHARD GERE.
SO
PLEASE RIGHT NOW THIS IS
RATHER THAN AN I UNDERSTAND
THAT AN OPTION AND IS THAT MY
PROBLEM IS THAT SHE'S SO AND SO
I MET SOME FOLKS LIKE THAT AND
HONESTLY NOT TO HER BUT PERHAPS
BETTER THAN THAT I REALLY
APPRECIATE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
TEACH OTHERS THIS CRISIS IS NOT
WHAT
SO THE THE QUESTION IS HOW
THE DEVELOPMENTS SO ARE AS SO
EAGER TO HAVE AND WHAT IT THIS
LIKE AND SO A COUPLE
OF EXAMPLES YOU GAVE US AND THE
PRESENTATION MADE A LOT
OF SENSE TO HOW YOU MANAGE THE
WASTE COLLECTION IS SHARED
SYSTEM BUT IT ISN'T REALLYN
INDIVIDUAL I HAVE CONCERNS
ABOUT MORE THAN
THIS POINT
ABOUT HOW LOOKS VERY DIFFERENT
AND THE COLLECTION THAT THAT IS
STORED IS YEAH.
BLACK FOR THIS ONE SIDE OF I
IMAGINE THE COLLECTION MUCH SO
YOU IT THAT DOWN ON THE WEB
ACTUALLY SO FOLKS IN THE NORTH
PART OF THIS YOU KNOW I KNOW I
JUST HAVE TROUBLE GETTING THAT
FOR EXAMPLE IN HERE TO IMAGINE
THAT PEOPLE ARE ESPECIALLY
YESTERDAY AS SO WORRIED ABOUT
THIS AND IT'S THE DEVELOPMENT
OF SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED HOMES
WHICH IS HOW THAT IS DESIRED
AND AND AS A CONSEQUENCE THIS
WAS BECAUSE I WORRIED ABOUT
PROVIDING A SENSE
OF RESPONSIBILITY SO I I JUST I
DON'T KNOW WHAT TO SAY OTHER
THAN THAT I'M JUST NOT ENTIRELY
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT WOULD BE
GREAT.
THANK YOU.
YOU HAVE THE BUDGET FOR I WILL
TAKE IT BUT I I THINK THIS
AND
I CAN I CAN OFFER SOME COMMENTS
TO THAT.
THE DEVELOPER IS WELCOME TO ADD
ANOTHER COLLECTION POINT THAT
IS SOMETHING THAT WE DID POINT
OUT TO THEM HAVING ONLY ONE
COLLECTION POINT IS PROBABLY
GOING TO REQUIRE MORE THAN ONE
TIP PER WEEK.
NOW THE BONUS OF THAT IS IT
GETS EMPTIED MORE OFTEN AND SO
IF ANYBODY IS CONCERNED ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT TRASH SMELLS,
YOU KNOW, THE TIPS ARE
HAPPENING MORE FREQUENTLY BUT
THAT IS AN OPTION.
THE DEVELOPER COULD PROVIDE A
SECONDARY ACCESS POINT.
>> WELL, AND THERE IS A
SECONDARY EDUCATION I THINK
IT'S AN EMERGENCY ACCESS.
>> I DON'T KNOW ALL THE REASONS
WHY IT'S EMERGENCY VERSUS FULL
TIME
BUT I UNDERSTAND ADDRESS
IS ONE THE WELL I MEAN THAT'S A
DIFFERENT QUESTION I THINK BUT
WELL WE DO HAVE A SOLID WASTE
MILLAGE AND WE DO HAVE A SOLID
WASTE ORDINANCE AND ORDINANCE
DOES WE DO HAVE A FRANCHISE
CONTRACT THAT IS WHO WE HAVE
AND IT'S NOT SOMETHING WHAT
YOU'RE SUGGESTING IS NOT
SOMETHING THAT WE HAVE EVER
ALLOWED CORRECT.
I'VE GOT COUNCIL MEMBER MELIK.
>> THANK YOU GUYS SO MUCH FOR
THIS PRESENTATION.
I'M DEFINITELY INTERESTED IN
TAKING YOU UP ON THE RIDE ALONG
OFFER.
I GUESS I'LL JUST GO AHEAD AND
SAY IT.
I PERSONALLY AM OBSESSED WITH
COMPOST.
MY HEAD EXPLODES EVERY TIME AN
ARBOR'S COMPOST SYSTEM IS
DISCUSSED BECAUSE I JUST GET SO
EXCITED ABOUT IT.
WELL I KNOW OUR SYSTEM IS NOT
PERFECT.
THE FACT THAT WE HAVE REGULAR
RESIDENTIAL CURBSIDE COMPOST
PICK UP IS A HUGE
ACCOMPLISHMENT.
I LITERALLY BRAG ABOUT THIS TO
MY COWORKERS IN LANSING WHO ARE
FROM OTHER AREAS OF THE STATE
THAT DON'T EVEN BELIEVE ME THAT
THIS IS POSSIBLE IN ANY WORLD
LET ALONE THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN.
>> SO I BRING IT UP PRETTY
FREQUENTLY.
IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING THAT MANY
ANN ARBOR RESIDENTS USE THE
COMPOST SERVICE FOR LAWN
CLIPPINGS AND DEBRIS BUT NOT
REALLY FOOD WASTE YET.
>> I WISH MORE RESIDENTS WOULD
USE THIS FEATURE OF COURSE.
>> SO MY QUESTION IS RELATED TO
EDUCATION AROUND COMPOST BUT
ALSO TRASH AND RECYCLING.
EDUCATION WAS A COMMON THEME
KIND OF THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE
PRESENTATION.
SO MY QUESTION IS WHAT ARE SOME
PLANS MOVING FORWARD AS AN
APPROACH TO EDUCATION?
I'M AWARE OF SOME OF THE
OUTREACH EFFORTS BUT I'M
CURIOUS WHAT ELSE YOU GUYS HAVE
PLANNED AND WHAT ELSE YOU GUYS
DO KIND OF COMPREHENSIVELY.
YEAH, THANK YOU FOR THE
QUESTION.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR ENTHUSIASM
ABOUT COMPOSTING AGAIN, IF YOU
WANT TO CHAT ABOUT THAT ALL
DAY.
I'M ALSO VERY EXCITED ABOUT IT.
WE ARE LOOKING AT WHAT WE CAN
DO FOR EDUCATION.
IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING THAT IN
YEARS PAST THERE WAS AT LEAST
AN ANNUAL MAILER THAT WOULD GO
OUT ABOUT SOLID WASTE SERVICES
AND THAT IS SOMETHING THAT
WE'VE BEEN WORKING TO BRING
BACK AT LEAST A ONE TIME A YEAR
TOUCHPOINT TO LET FOLKS KNOW
ABOUT WHAT CAN GO ON THEIR CARD
AND WHAT CAN'T GO ON THEIR CARD
AND WHERE TO FIND MORE
INFORMATION.
BUT FOR FOOD SCRAP DIVERSION
ESPECIALLY BECAUSE A STATE HAS
A GOAL OF DIVERTING NOT
REDUCING FOOD WASTE BY 50
PERCENT BY 2030.
THERE'S ALSO AN EPA GOAL SO
THAT'S A BIG FOCUS FOR US AND
WE HAVE BEEN WORKING SHE'S NOT
HERE BUT QUITE CLOSELY WITH OUR
FRIENDS IN OSSI TO TALK ABOUT
HOW WE COULD DO A ROBUST
EDUCATION CAMPAIGN THAT REALLY
TALKS ABOUT NOT ONLY COMPOSTING
BUT ALSO REDUCING FOOD WASTE
GENERATED TO BEGIN WITH AND
THEN WHAT YOU DO GENERATE
COMPOSTING OR IF IT'S STILL
EDIBLE MAKING SURE SOMEONE EATS
IT AND THEN COMPOSTING WHAT'S
LEFT.
SO THERE'S NO DEFINITIVE PLAN
YET BUT JUST TO SAY THERE IS A
LOT OF FOCUS ON THAT AND WE'VE
BEEN WORKING VERY CLOSELY WITH
THEM TO FIGURE OUT HOW WE CAN
RAISE AWARENESS AND GET BETTER
DIVERSION.
GREAT.
>> THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER BREEKS THANK
YOU.
I DON'T KNOW I DIDN'T THINK
WE'D BE SUPER EXCITED ABOUT
THIS.
WE ARE WE WE'D LOVE TO STOP.
I ALSO LIKE OUR COMPOSTING
SERVICE AND LOVE USING IT YEAR
ROUND FOR FOR FOOD WASTE AS
WELL.
SO A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS SOME
PIECES YOU RAISED AROUND THE
CHALLENGES OF A GROWING CITY
AND CHANGING LAND USE AND
DENHA.
THANK YOU.
I KNOW THERE'S A LOT OF YOU
KNOW, ADVOCATING FOR A LOT
OF CHANGES AND ON THE STREET
PRESENTING SOME ISSUES AND
GROWING RAPIDLY HOW IT IS IS
ARE THE LIMITATIONS THAT WE'RE
FACING AND I KNOW WE'RE KIND
OF FIGURING OUT AS WE GO A
LITTLE BIT THERE ARE
COMMUNITIES THAT ARE THAT HAVE
PUT IN SOME YOU KNOW, STREET
RECONFIGURATIONS SIMILAR TO
OURS AHEAD OF US, YOU KNOW,
SOMETIMES BY DECADES.
AND SO I'M JUST CURIOUS LIKE
WHERE ARE WE?
IS IT SOME THE EQUIPMENT THAT
WE HAVE THAT IS JUST DIFFICULT
TO CHANGE OUT OR ARE THESE
ISSUES THAT ARE REALLY EVERY
TYPE OF COMMUNITY IS IS IS
RECKONING WITH I THINK MOST
OF THEM ARE ARE ISSUES THAT
EVERY COMMUNITY THAT HAS THESE
TYPES OF FACILITIES ARE DEALING
WITH DOWNTOWN.
IT'S A LITTLE LESS LIKELY, YOU
KNOW, WE'RE GOING TO HAVE THE
SAME ISSUES BECAUSE WE'RE NOT
SERVICING WITH THE SIDE ON
TRUCKS AS OFTEN WE'VE GOT MORE
DUMPSTER SERVICE DOWNTOWN THAN
WE DO THE SITE COLLECTORS.
HOWEVER, WHEN WE PUT THIS NEW
BIKEWAY DOWN, MILLER THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT WE ARE GOING TO
HAVE TO CONTEND WITH SO WE ARE
WORKING WITH OUR FRIENDS AND
TRANSPORTATION AND ENGINEERING
TO MAKE SURE THAT WHATEVER WE
PUT OUT THERE IT'S GOING TO BE
CLEAR TO THE RESIDENTS WHAT
THEY NEED TO DO WITH THEIR
CARTS.
>> THANKS.
I THINK WE'RE PREPARED TO HELP
WITH THAT.
EDUCATION IS WHEN IT COMES TIME
.
THE OTHER PIECE I WAS HOPING
YOU MIGHT BE ABLE TO SPEAK TO A
LITTLE BIT IS A COUPLE
OF THINGS MAYBE JUST A COMMENT
THAT ANTICIPATE THAT WITH
EARLIER HOURS PARTICULARLY IN
DOWNTOWN THAT WE MIGHT SEE SOME
RESISTANCE OR YOU KNOW, SOME
FEEDBACK AROUND THAT OBVIOUSLY
IN THOSE TRUCKS BACK UP ON
MULTIPLE YOU KNOW, THEY CAN BE
PRETTY LOUD AND SO WE
APPRECIATE THAT.
SO DO WE UNDERSTAND I HAVE
SHARED WITH PLANNING AND I'VE
EVEN SHARED WITH DEVELOPERS
YOUR BUILDING DOWNTOWN AND
YOU'VE GOT DUMPSTER SERVICE
EVEN IF YOU AREN'T PROPOSING
BUT YOU'RE NEXT TO SOMETHING
WITH THE DUMPSTER PLAN FOR
WINDOWS PLAN FOR GOOD
INSULATION.
IT IS A REALITY THIS IS NOT YOU
CAN'T LIVE IN THE DOWNTOWN CORE
AND HAVE SUBURBAN TRASH
COLLECTION AND THEN FINALLY IF
YOU HAVE TIME TO BE ABLE TO
SPEAK AT ALL TO SORT OF OUR IF
WE'RE HAVING CHALLENGES WITH
OUR RECYCLING PROGRAM RIGHT NOW
IN TERMS OF CONTAMINATION
RATES, THAT'S SOMETHING I'M I'M
JUST WONDERING HOW WE'RE HOW
WE'RE ON ON THAT.
>> RIGHT.
THANK YOU FOR THE QUESTION.
WE'RE DOING GREAT.
YEAH, WE DO BIANNUAL AUDITS
COMPOSITION AUDITS WITH OUR
RECYCLING PARTNER RECYCLING ANN
ARBOR AND IN OUR PROCESSING
AGREEMENT WITH THEM WE HAVE A
LIMIT.
WE TRY TO STAY UNDER 12 PERCENT
CONTAMINATION IN OUR LAST AUDIT
THAT WAS COMPLETED IN EARLY
NOVEMBER WE WERE LIKE ELEVEN
POINT SIX.
I WANT TO SAY DON'T HOLD ME TO
THE POINT BUT IT'S WE WERE
UNDER TWELVE SO WE'RE DOING
REALLY WELL.
WE HAVE SEEN SINCE THE MURPHREE
OPENED IN DECEMBER OF TWENTY
ONE AND WE'VE BEEN DOING THESE
AUDITS.
WE HAVE SEEN SOME SEASONALITY
WHERE THE SPRING AUDIT ALTHOUGH
SPRING HAS RANGED FROM MAY,
JUNE, JULY JUST DEPENDING ON
SCHEDULING WHEN WE GET IT
SCHEDULED AND WINTER WHICH
WINTER HAS RANGED FROM
OCTOBER , NOVEMBER, DECEMBER
THE SPRING DOES TEND TO HAVE A
LITTLE BIT HIGHER CONTAMINATION
RATE THAN THE FALL AND THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT WE'VE BEEN IN
CONVERSATION WITH OUR PARTNER
ABOUT TO FIGURE OUT.
WE'VE I THINK FIVE AUDITS NOW
SO WE'RE STARTING TO SEE THAT
MAYBE THIS ACTUALLY IS A TREND
AND IS THERE SOMETHING THERE
THAT WE CAN ADDRESS?
WE THOUGHT ORIGINALLY MAYBE HAD
SOMETHING TO DO WITH STUDENT
MOVE OUT LIKE AT THE END OF THE
SPRING SEMESTER.
BUT AS I MENTIONED, WE'VE MOVED
IT AROUND A COUPLE OF TIMES TO
TRY TO AVOID THAT PEAK WHICH IS
SORT OF THE END OF APRIL EARLY
MAY AND WE'VE STILL SEEN A
LITTLE BIT HIGHER CONTAINMENT.
THAT'S JUST A LITTLE BIT
CURIOUS WHAT'S DRIVING THAT
.
BUT EVEN THEN I WOULD STILL SAY
THAT WE OUR PROGRAM LOOKS
REALLY GOOD ACTUALLY.
>> I THINK ONE QUESTION THAT'S
WHAT'S OUR PARTNERSHIP LOOK
LIKE WITH THE AND OUR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS IN TERMS OF WITH THE
ECOLOGY CENTER AND EDUCATION?
>> I'VE JUST BEEN DISAPPOINTED
AT TIMES WHEN I GO TO SCHOOL
EVENTS AND AND NOTICE HOW
LITTLE RECYCLING IS HAPPENING.
I'M JUST CURIOUS THAT'S IF
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT REALLY IS
THE SCHOOL ED PIECE OF THINGS
OR IF THAT IS YOU KNOW THAT'S A
PARTNERSHIP THAT WE'RE WE'RE
WORKING ON.
>> WELL WELL WE WE DO HAVE A
CONTRACT WITH THE ECOLOGY
CENTER TO PROVIDE EDUCATION AND
OUTREACH AND MARKETING FOR ALL
OF OUR PROGRAMS.
ONE OF THOSE AREAS IS YOUTH
EDUCATION.
SO YOU HAVE A LONG PARTNERSHIP
WITH THE ECOLOGY FOR ECOLOGY
CENTER FOR YOUTH EDUCATION AND
THE CURRENT CONTRACT WE DID
BROADEN THE WORK AREAS TO
INCLUDE COMMERCIAL MULTIFAMILY
COMMUNITY EVENTS AND A SOCIAL
BASED MARKETING CAMPAIGN AND
THE YOUTH EDUCATION PIECE WAS
STRUCTURED SUCH THAT EVERY
STUDENT IN A SECOND GRADE CLASS
,EVERY STUDENT AND A SEVENTH
GRADE CLASS GETS A PROGRAM FROM
THE ECOLOGY CENTER SO THEY ARE
GETTING THE SECOND GRADE
PROGRAMING IS IN PARTNERSHIP
WITH THE FREEMAN ENVIRONMENTAL
CENTER.
THEY GO THERE FOR A FIELD TRIP
HALF DAY THE ECOLOGY CENTER
DOING TRASH STUFF VERY COOL
LEGO MODEL OF THE LANDFILL AND
IT'S JUST REALLY FABULOUS AND
THEN A SEVENTH GRADE PROGRAM
THEY TAKE A BUS TOUR OF OUR
RESOURCE RECOVERY CENTER SO
THEY GET TO DRIVE BY THE CLOSED
LANDFILL, THE COMPOST FACILITY,
THE TRANSFER STATION, THE MURPH
TO SEE WHERE EVERYTHING THAT
GETS PICKED UP GOES.
SO WE ARE STILL VERY INVESTED
IN THAT EDUCATION PROGRAM WITH
YOUTH I THINK IN TERMS
OF OPERATIONS AT THE SCHOOL FOR
PROGRAMS THAT IS MORE ON THE
SCHOOLS.
>> YES.
MAYBE WHAT I'M GETTING SINCE
PARENT VOLUNTEERS SETTING UP
STUFF IN THE HIGH SCHOOL LEVEL
MAYBE NOT AS INTENSE.
THANKS.
APPRECIATE IT.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON.
I KNOW WELL I DO ON A SECOND
ALL OF MY COUNCIL MEMBERS
COMMENTS APPRECIATING THE WORK
OF THE SOLID WASTE TEAM HERE
AND YOUR PRESENTATION I HAD A
CONSTITUENT THAT LIVED IN A
CONDO ASSOCIATION REACH OUT TO
ME ACTUALLY EARLIER TODAY
ASKING ABOUT THE THIS SIZE
OF CITY COMPOST BINS AND AM I
CORRECT IN SAYING THAT THE CITY
AT ONE POINT OFFERED A SMALLER
THIRTY TWO GALLON COMPOST BINS
AND I KNOW THAT THAT WE STILL
OFFER THOSE I THINK FOR
RECYCLING AND I'M NOT SURE
ABOUT TRASH BUT WAS THERE A
REASON THAT WE NO LONGER OFFER
THIRTY TWO GALLON SMALLER
COMPOST BINS AND IS THERE ANY
QUESTION OF WHETHER THAT MIGHT
HELP IN SOME OF THESE
MULTIFAMILY SCENARIOS?
>> I CAN'T SPEAK TO IF WE EVER
OFFERED A THIRTY TWO GALLON
COMPOST CART I CAN TELL YOU
THAT WE HAVE STOPPED ISSUING
THIRTY TWO GALLON RECYCLE AND
TRASH CARTS FOR THE VERY REASON
THAT THEY FALL INTO THE TRASH
TRUCK.
>> SO IT'S IT'S JUST A HAZARD
AND IT'S TOO SMALL AND SO WE
HAVE STOPPED ISSUING THOSE.
>> THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK YOU.
AN EXCELLENT EXAMPLE STUFF THAT
GOES ON IN THE CITY EVERY
SINGLE DAY WORKING FOR THE
RESIDENTS.
MR. TONY, WANT TO CLOSE IT OUT
WITH YOU PRIOR TO BECOMING
THANK YOU.
>> I JUST WANTED TO POINT OUT
YOU'VE BEEN SEEING A WIDE
VARIETY OF PEOPLE PRESENTING TO
YOU THAT IS INTENTIONAL.
WE NEED TO GIVE MORE OF OUR
PROFESSIONAL STAFF THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK IN FRONT
OF COUNSEL TO SHOW THE
EXPERTIZE THAT THEY HAVE.
IT'S PART OF PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT BUT IT ALSO
DEMONSTRATES IT TAKES A FULL
TEAM OF PEOPLE IN ORDER TO
PROVIDE THE FUNCTION TO OUR
RESIDENTS EACH DAY SO YEAH,
IT'S A LOT OF FOLKS COMING AT
YOU BUT IT SHOWS THE DIFFERENT
ROLES THAT THEY PLAY AND WE'RE
GOING TO CONTINUE IT.
>> SO THANK YOU.
WELL WITHOUT HAVING PULLED
COUNSEL FULLY I CAN SAY THAT
WE'RE DELIGHTED BY WHAT WE HEAR
AND DELIGHTED BY THE PEOPLE
THAT COME IN AND SPEAK IT.
>> SO THE MORE THE MERRIER.
COME ON SPEAKING YOU COME ON
DOWN.
IT'S NOW AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PUBLIC COMMENT.
ARE PUBLIC COMMENTS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS THE
PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO COUNCIL IN
THE COMMUNITY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
OF PUBLIC COMMENT ONE NEED NOT
HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE WHEN
YOU'RE ATTENDING A WORK SESSION
SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES WHO
HAVE THREE MINUTES IN WHICH TO
SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
AT THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY YOU IN
THIRTY SECONDS REMAINING AND
WHEN YOUR TIME IS EXPIRED WHEN
YOUR TIME'S EXPIRED PLEASE
CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS AND CEDE
THE FLOOR.
IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC COMMENT
?
GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR THE DISCUSSION
TONIGHT I WANT TO QUICKLY
REVISIT A COUPLE OF THE
MANDATES THAT YOU SET FORWARD
FOR THE PLAN PROCESS.
THESE INCLUDED DENSIFICATION
OF HOUSING DISTRICTS THROUGHOUT
THE CITY, FEWER ZONING
DISTRICTS AND POLICIES THAT
UNDO OR SEEK TO REPAIR PAST
LAND USE PRACTICES THAT
RESULTED IN EXCLUSION PEOPLE.
THERE ARE THREE MAJOR ITEMS
THAT WORRY ME THE MOST ABOUT
THE DRAFT RIGHT NOW, EACH
OF WHICH APPEAR TO CONTRADICT
THE GOALS YOU'VE LAID OUT.
ONE THAT WASN'T HIGHLIGHTED
TONIGHT IS THE PROPOSED
RESTRICTION ON THE EXPANSION
OF THE DOWNTOWN WHICH
CONTRADICTS VIRTUALLY ALL THE
FEEDBACK I SAW ON THE PUBLIC
MEETINGS.
A NEW TRANSITION DISTRICT IS
PROPOSED TO BE 80 FEET AND
SURROUND THE DOWNTOWN TO THE
NORTH IN THE NOT HISTORIC AREA
TO THE EAST OF CAMPUS.
NEW YORK CITY'S WASHTENAW TO
THE SASE USA WILLIAM AND IN
LOWERTOWN AND CAPPING THIS AREA
TO 80 FEET WOULD LIMIT
BUILDINGS WHERE THEY'RE BEING
PROPOSED THE MOST PREVENTING
MORE LIKE THE ONES YOU APPROVED
ON FOREST CHURCH.
I WOULD ALSO MAKE FIVE CORNERS
AND BEEKMAN ILLEGAL IN THE
SHORT TERM THIS IS THE MOST
CONCERNING PROPOSAL IN MY VIEW
THERE'S NO NEED TO TAPER DOWN
DENSITY FOR SEVERAL BLOCKS.
ANOTHER CONCERN IS THE CREATION
OF SPECIAL DISTRICTS RESTRICT
OR PROHIBIT HOUSING,
EMPLOYMENT, INNOVATION AND
RETAIL WHICH YOU GUYS DISCUSSED
TONIGHT.
ON THE SURFACE THE EMPLOYMENT
ZONE IS APPEALING FROM THE
STANDPOINT OF PRESERVING SOME
BUSINESSES THAT A LOT OF US
KNOW AND LOVE.
BUT THESE COME AND GO ON THEIR
OWN AND IN MY OPINION IT'S
PREFERABLE NOT TO TRY TO FREEZE
THEM WHERE THEY ARE AND EXCLUDE
HOUSING BUT RATHER TO ALLOW
HOUSING TO GROW AMONG THOSE
BUSINESSES.
AND IF THE HOUSING PRESSURE IS
SO GREAT THAT SOME OF THOSE
BUSINESSES ARE EVENTUALLY
DISPLACED, THIS MEANS THAT
HOUSING IS DESPERATELY NEEDED
AND SHOULD BE ALLOWED AND THE
SOLUTION FOR CULTIVATING A
SMALL BUSINESS ECOSYSTEM IS TO
ALLOW THEM TO RELOCATE AND
START IN PLACES WHERE THEY'RE
CURRENTLY NOT ALLOWED LIKE LOW
DENSITY NEIGHBORHOODS IN
ADDITION, APARTMENT BUILDINGS
CREATE TONS OF BLUE COLLAR JOBS
TO SUPPORT THEM PLUMBING,
ELECTRICAL, ADRAC ETC. FAR IN
EXCESS OF THE JOBS IN THE LOW
DENSITY BUILDINGS THEY WOULD
REPLACE THE INNOVATION DISTRICT
IN PLYMOUTH WOULD ATTACH SOME
IMPLIED MANDATES FOR OFFICE AND
RESEARCH SPACE IF THERE'S A
FEAR OF RESIDENTIAL
OVERWHELMING AVAILABLE PROPERTY
AGAIN THAT'S BECAUSE THERE'S A
SEVERE SHORTAGE AND IT SHOULD
BE ALLOWED TO BE BUILT.
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT TECH FIRMS
DO SOMETHING THEY REALLY WANT
OFF SPACE NEAR NORTH CAMPUS
WILL BUILD IT IF THEY CAN
WITHSTAND THE TAXES AND EXPENSE
EXPENSIVE LAND THAT THEY WOULD
HAVE TO ENDURE TO LOCATE THERE
AND AS IT IS NOW THERE'S A GLUT
OF OFFICE SPACE.
SO THAT'S MAKING RESIDENTIAL
COST PROHIBITIVE.
WE ATTACH A MANDATE WITH REGARD
TO THE RETAIL ZONE.
I ECHO THE COMMENT ALLOWING
INCREMENTAL ONE STOREY
REDEVELOPMENT OF OUR LAND AND
WEST GATE WOULD BE MISGUIDED
BECAUSE IT WOULD INITIATE
ANOTHER ROUND OF LONG TERM
LEASES AND PERPETUATE THIS AUTO
DOMINATED LANDFORM.
>> WE NEED BOLD POLICY CHANGE
AND I WOULD SUGGEST THAT THIS
MEANS NOT ITERATING FROM THE
STATUS QUO BUT RATHER ASKING
WHERE SHOULD WE DELIBERATE
DELIBERATELY EXCLUDE OR LIMIT
HOUSING AND WHY.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK IN PUBLIC
COMMENT?
SO DERIAN NEW BACKER PRESIDENT
ROBERTSON SIX NINE OH FIVE
TELEGRAPH ROAD BLOOMFIELD
HILLS, MICHIGAN FORTY THREE
ZERO ONE.
I JUST WANT TO SPEAK REAL
BRIEFLY.
I THOUGHT A PRESENTATION ON
SOLID WASTE WAS COMPLETELY
FAIR.
SOME OF THE CHALLENGES THAT
THEY FACE I GUESS JUST ONE
THING I WANT TO POINT OUT THAT
OUR ORGANIZATION IS INVOLVED IN
A NUMBER OF PROJECTS ANN ARBOR
.
WE'VE GOT A A LARGE PROJECT.
WE'VE BEEN IN FRONT OF YOU A
LOT MORE TIMES ON OUR SIDE
CALLED THE VILLAGE OF AN IRA
THAT'S GOING TO BE AROUND SIX
HUNDRED HOMES.
WE'VE GOT ANOTHER ONE THAT'S
WORKING ITS WAY THROUGH THE
PROCESS CALLED SEVENTY FIVE S
AT SEVENTY FIVE TOWNHOUSES
WHICH IRONICALLY WAS DELVAUX
DEVELOPMENT PLAN B.
S THERE EARLIER.
SO SO WE EITHER DEVELOP OR WE
DID LOOK AT A SECOND DUMPSTER
LOCATION.
IT'S IT COMES ON THE BASIS
OF EVERYTHING I GOING TO SAY
TONIGHT IS THE FACT THAT THERE
HAS TO BE SOME LEVEL
OF COMPROMISES FOR CERTAIN
DEVELOPMENT STYLES.
SO COULD WE PUT IT ON ANOTHER
LOCATION?
OF COURSE IT JUST MEANS A LOSS
OF PROBABLY TWO TO FOUR MORE
UNITS.
SO WHAT ARE THE THINGS MY
HOUSING TYPOLOGY THAT I THINK
YOU GUYS OR YOUR CITY NEEDS
MORE OF IS HOUSING STYLE?
WE DO A LOT OF IT ROBERTSON
WHICH IS THREE STOREY TOWNHOUSE
SO THEY BUILD THAT 14 TO 18
ACRE THE THE DEVELOPMENT THAT
YOU SAW BEFORE DEVELOPMENT B
THAT WAS TWO STOREY TOWNHOUSES
SO THOSE A SIX TO EIGHT UNITS
PER ACRE THEY HAVE AN
INDIVIDUAL DRIVEWAY SO COULD
THEY PICK UP THEIR FOUR TRASH
IS NOT AN ISSUE.
I'M THREE STORY TOWNHOUSES
BECAUSE THEY'RE FORTY EIGHT
UNITS ACRE THAT BECOME WITH
SOME CHALLENGES SO I CAN TELL
YOU THAT I'VE NEVER WE'VE BUILT
IN A DOZEN COMMUNITIES THOSE
PROJECTS AND I'VE NEVER HAD TO
PUT A DUMPSTER I JUST HAVEN'T
HOW THEY GET PICKED UP THAT YOU
KNOW I'M HAPPY TO GO AND TAKE
VIDEOS OF THE DOZEN COMMUNITIES
WE HAVE ACTIVE AND HOW THEY GET
TRASH SERVICE.
I SUSPECT THE DISCONNECT HERE
IS TRASH SERVICE AND THAT TYPE
OF PRODUCT TYPE IF YOU'RE GOING
TO BUILD THAT THAT DENSITY
LEVEL WHICH I THINK YOU WANT, I
DON'T THINK IT'S REASONABLE TO
EXPECT THAT YOU'RE GOING TO BE
ABLE TO USE SIDE LOAD
AUTOMATED.
IT'S JUST THE UNITS ARE THREE
STORIES TALL AND THERE'S YOU
KNOW, YOU HAVE TO COMPROMISE IF
YOU WANT THAT LEVEL, THAT'S IT.
AND IT'S AN IMPORTANT PRODUCT
TYPE.
IT TRANSITIONS FROM A VERTICAL
BUILDINGS TO YOUR TWO STOREY
RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
IT GET YOU THE DENSITY YOU WANT
TO GET YOU AT PRICE POINTS YOU
WANT SO WE WOULD JUST ASK FOR
SOME LEVEL OF COMPROMISE.
CAN I PUT IT ON AN ABSOLUTELY
MY INTENTIONS UNLESS I'M
LEGALLY TOLD I CAN AS I'M GOING
TO TRY TO I'M GOING TO BUILD
THE IF I HAVE TO BUILD IT I
WILL BECAUSE I HAVE TO BUILD
EVERY SO I HAVE TO COMPROMISE
AS A DEVELOPER.
BUT WHAT I WOULD INTEND TO DO
UNLESS I'M TOLD LEGALLY I CAN'T
IS I WILL PROBABLY CONTRACT AT
MY OWN COST.
I WILL BUILD A DUMPSTER.
I'LL PUT EVERYTHING IN THERE
AND THEN I'LL PAY FOR PRIVATE
SERVICE TO SHOW THAT IT CAN BE
DONE SAFELY AND EFFICIENTLY
AGAIN I WILL.
I BUILT A BUILDING IN DOWNTOWN
FARMINGTON, THAT BUILDING IN
DOWNTOWN DETROIT, THE SAME
PRODUCT THAT NO DUMPSTERS.
SO I DON'T KNOW WHERE THE
DISCONNECT IS BUT I CAN TAKE
VIDEOS OF EXACTLY HOW OUR STUFF
IS BEING SERVICED AND IT'S NOT
BEING SERVICE IN A UNSAFE OR
INEFFICIENT MANNER.
>> SO SO THAT'S ALL I HAVE SO
PERFECT.
>> THANK YOU.
THERE ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE I'D
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS SPEAK AT
PUBLIC COMMENT.
>> HI MY NAME IS TOM WONG.
I LIVE AT TWENTY SEVEN NINETY
FIVE WHEN I WOULD DRIVE AND I'M
AFFILIATED WITH THE UNIVERSITY
URBANISM CLUB.
WE HAVE A FEW MEMBERS HERE
EARLIER BUT SINCE IT'S GETTING
LATE PEOPLE LEFT.
SO I CAME IN TODAY TRYING TO
TALK ABOUT THE EMPLOYMENT AND
INNOVATION HELP AND A LOT
OF TIME DURING THE PLANNING
COMMISSION SESSION SOME PEOPLE
FIRED SHOTS AT EMPLOYMENT ZONE
WHICH CURRENTLY PROHIBITS
RESIDENTIAL USE.
BUT IF YOU ACTUALLY TOOK A LOOK
AT THE MAP, I THINK MOST
OF THEM ARE LOCATED RIGHT ALONG
RAILROADS AND OR DIRECTLY
ADJACENT TO HIGHWAY AND I
BELIEVE THOSE AREN'T DESIRABLE
RESIDENTIAL LAND ANYWAYS.
BUT IF WE LOOK AT INNOVATION
THAT IS PRIME LOCATION UP NORTH
AND I WOULD ARGUE THAT THE
CURRENTLY THE BIGGEST SHORTAGE
UP NORTH IS NOT RESIDENTIAL
UNITS BUT ACTUALLY COMMERCIAL
BECAUSE I KNOW A LOT OF FRIENDS
WHO GO TO SCHOOL AND CAMPUS AND
SOME PEOPLE WHO DON'T LIVE UP
NORTH.
THE FIRST REASON IT'S NOT
BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE ENOUGH
HOUSING UNITS UP NORTH BECAUSE
THERE'S CLOSE TO NO AMENITIES
FOR ANY KIND OF SOCIAL EVENTS
OR JUST DINING PLACES UP NORTH
AND I THINK I HEARD ABOUT THE
WORRY THAT RESIDENTIAL UNITS
MIGHT JUST TAKE OVER THE PLAN.
BUT WHAT IF WE PRIORITIZE THAT
TO BECOME COMMERCIAL USE RATHER
THAN RESIDENTIAL INSTEAD
OF PRIORITIZING LET'S SAY
OFFICE SPACE BECAUSE I KNOW WE
ARE UNDER THE UNIVERSITY BUT WE
DON'T NECESSARILY HAVE TO SPEAK
IN FAVOR OF THEM.
AND MY POINT IS IF THE
UNIVERSITY IS NOT DOING DUE
DILIGENCE IN PROVIDING STUDENTS
AND STAFF WITH ENOUGH GOOD
OPTIONS TO EAT AND SHOP, THEN
WHY DOES THE CITY HAVE TO
PROVIDE OFFICE SPACE FOR LIKE
VENTURE COMPANIES COMING OUT
OF THE UNIVERSITY?
AND IN MY OPINION THAT PIECE
OF LAND WHICH IS LOCATED AT THE
INTERSECTION OF MAJOR ROADS AND
WHERE TRANSIT CONVERGES SHOULD
BE BETTER OFF USED FOR
COMMERCIAL WHETHER THAT'S MORE
RETAIL STORES OR BETTER DINING
OPTIONS RATHER THAN TO
FACILITATE MORE OFFICE SPACE.
>> THANK YOU
.
HI I'M SOPHIA.
I AM ALSO A BIOMEDICAL
ENGINEERING STUDENT AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN AND I
LIVE AT BEEKMAN IN WARD ONE GO
WARD ONE.
THIS IS MY FIRST TIME SPEAKING
AT PUBLIC COMMENT.
I JUST WANTED TO SHARE A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT MY HOUSING JOURNEY IN
ANN ARBOR.
BASICALLY I FOUND IT TO BE VERY
EXPENSIVE TO BE ABLE TO GET
EVERYTHING YOU WANT OR NEED OUT
OF HOUSING.
I LIVED IN A VERY TALL HIGH
RISE BUILDING IN DOWNTOWN WHICH
WAS GREAT.
I LOVED THE PROXIMITY BUT IT
WAS VERY EXPENSIVE.
I LIVED IN A MID RISE APARTMENT
COMPLEX ON NORTH CAMPUS WHICH
WAS NICE AND PEACEFUL BUT IT
WAS VERY HARD TO ACCESS GROCERY
STORES OR THINGS AROUND ME SO I
LEFT THERE.
NOW I LIVE IN WARD ONE IN A
MIXED USE PLACE AND I LOVE IT
BUT IT'S VERY, VERY EXPENSIVE
SO I JUST WANT TO REITERATE
THAT IT'S VERY HARD TO FIND
HOUSING THAT MEETS ALL OF YOUR
NEEDS AND I DO THINK THAT
HOUSING WE ARE IN CRISIS IN ANN
ARBOR.
IT'S REALLY, REALLY HARD AND A
LOT OF STUDENTS EITHER HAVE TO
PAY A LOT TO FIND HOUSING THAT
SUPPORTS THEM OR YOU LIVE IN
RUNDOWN OLD HOUSES THAT ARE NOT
WELL MAINTAINED AND IT'S KIND
OF EITHER OR YOU'RE EITHER
PAYING TOO MUCH OR NOT GETTING
WHAT YOU NEED.
SO I WOULD JUST ASK THAT
COUNCIL KIND OF TAKE SOME TIME
TO REALLY UNDERSTAND THE
STUDENT PERSPECTIVE WITH THAT
STRUGGLE TO HOUSING AND ALSO
ALLOW FOR DENSIFICATION AND
RELAX THOSE LIMITS.
I THINK PEOPLE CAN LEARN TO
LOVE A LOT OF THINGS AND WE
HEARD A LOT ABOUT THAT FOR UNIT
MANDATE AND MAYBE THAT'S LIKE
THAT CAN BE RELAXED POTENTIALLY
IF WE GO BACK TO THE COMMUNITY
AND SAY HEY, HOW DOES THIS
SOUND?
I THINK THAT THERE ARE A LOT
OF PEOPLE THAT WOULD BE OKITH
THAT BECAUSE THEY DO UNDERSTAND
THAT HOUSING IS DESPERATELY
NEEDED.
>> THAT'S ALL I HAVE TO SAY.
THANKS.
THANK YOU, SIR.
ANYONE HOUSE LET THIS BE A
PUBLIC COMMENT TO ANYONE ONLINE
I'D LIKE TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC
COMMENT.
>> YEAH, WE HAVE A COUPLE
OF PEOPLE ONLINE.
>> ADAM SAVAGE, DO YOU HAVE A
COMMENT?
HI, THIS IS MISCAVIGE CALLING
FROM THE FOURTH WARD.
I WROTE TO YOU LAST WEEK WITH
SOME SPECIFIC CONCERNS THAT I
HAD WITH WHAT WAS PRESENTED THE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
I STILL HAVE THOSE CONCERNS
AFTER WATCHING TONIGHT'S
PRESENTATION.
IF YOU HAVE NOT YET DONE SO, I
ENCOURAGE YOU TO WATCH THAT
DISCUSSION AND THE PUBLIC
COMMENTS TONIGHT.
I WOULD LIKE TO MAKE SOME MORE
GENERAL POINTS ABOUT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN RATHER THAN
REITERATING THOSE CONCERNS.
A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS IN A
VERY REAL SENSE OUR VISION FOR
THE FUTURE BARNABUS BUILT
ENVIRONMENT I REALIZE THAT SOME
PEOPLE ARE NOT COMFORTABLE WITH
CHANGE AND THIS VISION FEELS
SCARY TO THEM.
BUT OTHERS ARE COMFORTABLE WITH
CHANGE AND IN FACT WELCOME IT.
YES, CHANGE BUT IT CAN ALSO BE
CONSTRUCTIVE.
THE STATUS QUO IS NOT WORKING.
WE ARE IN A HOUSING CRISIS AND
WE ARE IN A CLIMATE CRISIS.
WE CAN CHOOSE TO BE BOLD TO
WRITE A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT
EMBRACES CHANGE AND HELPS MOVE
US TOWARD A POSITIVE VISION FOR
THE FUTURE OF ANN ARBOR OR WE
CAN CHOOSE TO BE TIMID TO
THREAD THE NEEDLE IN AN ATTEMPT
TO PRESERVE NEIGHBORHOOD
CHARACTER.
BY WATERING DOWN THAT VISION I
HOPE TO SEE A COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN THAT ALLOWS FOR DENSITY
AND FORMS OF HOUSING WE NEED
THROUGHOUT THE CITY TO DIG
OURSELVES OUT OF OUR HOUSING
CRISIS.
NOW IS NOT THE TIME FOR THE
EXCLUSIONARY LAND-USE POLICIES
OF THE PAST.
LET'S STRIVE FOR A GREATER
FUTURE.
>> ANN ARBOR FOR ALL THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
CALLER WITH THE PHONE
NUMBER ENDING IN ONE NINE FOUR
FIVE STAR SIX ON MEET YOUR
PHONE GO AHEAD.
HELLO THIS IS RITA MITCHELL
CALLING.
>> I AM AT SIX TO ONE FIFTH
STREET AND MY I AM A MEMBER
OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
THAT I WANT TO JUST LET YOU ARE
THAT I AM SPEAKING FOR MYSELF
TONIGHT AND I APPRECIATE THE
REVIEW OF THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
I WOULD LIKE TO ENCOURAGE THE
STAFF AND PLANNING COMMISSION
AS THEY MOVE FORWARD TO
EXPLICITLY INCLUDE ELEMENTS
OF NATURAL FEATURES IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT
ACKNOWLEDGE THE IMPORTANCE
OF TREES AND VEGETATION TO
SUPPORT CURRENT SEQUESTRATION
HEAT ISLAND EFFECTS FILTERING
OF WATER AND AIR AND HABITAT
FOR ANIMALS OF ALL TYPES AS
WELL AS THE NATURAL HEALTH
BENEFITS OF EXPOSURE TO NATURAL
FEATURES OR SO AS WE MOVE
FORWARD WITH DENSIFICATION
WHICH FORMS LIKE A SOLID
MOVEMENT THAT'S BEING PLANNED
FOR IT, THAT'S GREAT.
BUT I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT AS
WE MOVE FORWARD WE IDENTIFY THE
ESSENTIAL NATURE AND INCLUDE
NATURAL FEATURES THAT HELP US
MAKE THIS BE THE RESULT OF A
LOVABLE AND WALKABLE CITY THAT
WE WANT TO HAVE.
IMAGINE WALKING DOWN STREETS
WITHOUT TREES.
NOBODY'S GOING TO WANT TO BE IN
THAT WALKABLE TYPE NEIGHBORHOOD
.
IMAGINE WALKING DOWN STREETS
WITHOUT ANY KIND OF GREEN
APPEARING.
IT'S JUST PRETTY UNINTERESTING
.
SO I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THERE'S AN INCORPORATION
AND THAT IT APPLIES IT IS
APPLIED AS A NATURAL COURSE
OF THE PLANNING PROCESS.
THAT'S MY WISH.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
I HOPE THAT YOU CONTINUE TO
ACTION.
THANK YOU
CALLER WITH THE PHONE
NUMBER AND FIVE THREE FOUR
CRESTAR SIX ON YOUR PHONE.
GO AHEAD GREYMAN STALBERG
CALLING FROM LOWERTOWN IN ANN
ARBOR.
I WANT TO SAY HELLO TO MY
NEIGHBOR OVER AT BEEKMAN A VERY
CLOSE TO YOU.
I JUST WANT TO ECHO WHAT THE
LAST CALLER JUST SAID.
AN IMPORTANT PART OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS HELPING
US DEVELOP AN ECOSYSTEM FOR THE
CITY AN ARBOR
, A PLACE WHERE WE
CAN ALL LIVE NOT JUST THE
WAREHOUSE, NOT TO MENTION THE
ROBERTSON BROTHERS DEVELOPMENTS
THAT HE MENTIONED A COUPLE
OF THEM BUT THE ONE IN
PARTICULAR ON THE NORTH SIDE IS
THE PIONEER TRAIL AND GIVEN I'D
LIKE TO COMMEND THE SOUTH FOR
THE MIXED HOUSING TYPES.
THERE ARE PART OF THAT
DEVELOPMENT BOTH FOR OWNERSHIP
AND FOR RENT AND DIFFERENT
TYPES OF HOUSING.
HEITZ DETACHED DETACHED
APARTMENT BUILDINGS MAIN VERSUS
TUAOLO AND HOPEFULLY THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WE CAN FIND
WAYS TO ENCOURAGE A MIX
OF HOUSING TYPES NOT TO HAVE
MONOLITHIC TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT
BY ESSENTIALLY JUST
DEREGULATING AND LETTING THE
MARKET GIVE US WHATEVER THE
MARKET WANTS TO GIVE US.
>> I WANT TO TURN TO SOMETHING
VERY SPECIFIC AND AGAIN AS WE
DEVELOP THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
ACCOMMODATE THINGS THAT
DIRECTLY MEET OUR GOALS AS
OPPOSED TO JUST DEREGULATING
AND FOR INDIRECT MEASURES TO
MEET OUR GOALS.
WHAT ARE THE THINGS THAT CAN
DIRECTLY MEET OUR GOAL OF A
TEAM THAT WILL BE PRICED HOME
OWNERSHIP?
THAT'S SOMETHING REALLY
STRIKING RIGHT NOW IN ANN
ARBOR.
I'M A BROKER.
I'M A LANDLORD.
THIS IS MY BUSINESS USED TO
DEVELOP SUBDIVISIONS.
I DON'T DO THAT ANYMORE.
I MOVED HERE THIRTY YEARS AGO.
I MOVED BACK TO TRY PLACE WITH
TWO FRIENDS ONE TIME TO BUY A
COUPLE OF DUPLEXES AND IT
HELPED A LOT OF OTHER PEOPLE
FIND HOMEOWNERSHIP IN DUPLEXES
AND THAT'S ONE WAY TO DO IT.
THERE'S A NEW WAY OUT.
I WANT TO MENTION THE END IN
OUR COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS
AMOUNT EIGHTEEN VLT DOT OR FOR
ANYBODY WHO WANTS MORE
INFORMATION I'M NOT A MEMBER
OF THAT GROUP OFFICIALLY BUT
I'VE BEEN WORKING WITH THEM
INVESTING IN THEM AND
PROSELYTIZING NOW FOR IN OTHER
COMMITTEE LATHROP BECAUSE IT'S
A WAY THAT WE CAN HAVE
HOMEOWNERSHIP PAYING THE PRICE
BY ANYBODY WHO WANTS TO TALK TO
ME ABOUT IT.
I INTEND TO TALK TO ALL THE
COUNCIL MEMBERS DIRECTLY ABOUT
THIS.
IT'S HAPPENING.
WE'RE MAKING IT HAPPEN.
THERE'S GOING TO BE HOMES TO
LOOK AT HOPEFULLY BEFORE THE
END OF THIS CALENDAR YEAR AND A
LOT MORE NEXT CALENDAR.
>> THIRTY SECONDS WE ARE
LOOKING TO HAVE OUR CRITICAL
WORKERS, PEOPLE WHO ARE
ESSENTIAL TO LIFE IN THE CITY
WHO CANNOT FLY IN THE CITY
UNDER THE CURRENT MARKET FORCES
MAKING A WAY THAT THEY CAN BUY
A TABLET PRICED HOME.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU
.
ADAM GOODMAN, DO YOU HAVE A
COMMENT?
HI, YES.
THIS IS ADAM GOODMAN.
I'M SPEAKING TO YOU FROM THE
FIFTH WARD.
I ALSO WENT TO RECOMMEND THAT
ALL OF YOU ACTUALLY WATCH THE
FULL CLINIC MISSION DISCUSSION
FROM I BELIEVE IT WAS JANUARY
2013 I THINK TONIGHT BECAUSE WE
HAD A MUCH MORE LIMITED AMOUNT
OF TIME AND STAFF WERE THEY
WERE UPFRONT ABOUT THIS.
THEY'RE TRYING TO EXPLAIN TO
YOU A POSITION THAT THEY DON'T
ENTIRELY AGREE WITH.
SO I THINK SOME THINGS GOT A
LITTLE JUMBLED AND DISTORTED
TONIGHT AND IT WOULD BE MUCH
BETTER IF YOU ACTUALLY HEARD
THE FULL DISCUSSION FROM YOU
KNOW, STRAIGHT FROM THOSE FOLKS
MOUTHS.
I'LL GIVE YOU ONE EXAMPLE WHICH
IS THIS DISCUSSION ABOUT
LIMITING TO FOUR UNITS PER SITE
IN IN LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
ZONE.
I DON'T THINK THAT WAS AT ALL
ABOUT LOOKING FOR MORE DENSITY
OR LARGER BUILDINGS.
IT'S ABOUT MORE FLEXIBILITY
WITH LIMITED TO FOUR CLASSES
THAN YOU'RE ACTUALLY CREATING
AN INCENTIVE AND A LOT HAS TO
MAKE A PARTICULAR TYPE
OF HOUSING WHICH IS SIX BEDROOM
UNITS.
WE'RE SEEING THIS HAPPEN NOW
UNDER OUR CURRENT ZONING CODE .
SO WHY SHOULD WE ALLOW YOU TO
BUILD FOUR OR SIX BEDROOM UNITS
BUT PREVENT YOU FROM BUILDING
SIX TWO BEDROOM UNITS?
THE LADDER IS ACTUALLY LESS
DENSE.
IT'S HALF AS MANY BEDS AND IF
WE GO WITH A UNIT DENSITY BASED
LIMIT THEN THIS IS THIS IS THE
SITUATION THAT WE'RE CREATING.
BUT EVEN MORE FUNDAMENTALLY
THAN THAT, I BELIEVE WE SHOULD
GET AWAY FROM REGULATING, YOU
KNOW, DENSITY THROUGH THIS
MEANS FOR A PRETTY BASIC
REASON, WHICH IS THAT I DON'T
THINK GOVERNMENT SHOULD BE IN
THE BUSINESS OF DEFINING WHAT A
FAMILY IS AND OUR UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE RIGHT NOW
LITERALLY DOES THIS BUT YOU CAN
LOOK IT UP IF WE MOVE TOWARDS
JUST BUILDING FORM BASED
RESTRICTIONS, I'M MUCH MORE
COMFORTABLE WITH THAT BECAUSE
YOU KNOW, I JUST DON'T THINK
REGULATING A FAMILY IS IS THE
GOVERNMENT'S BUSINESS.
FINALLY AND MAYBE MOST
IMPORTANTLY I WOULD LIKE YOU
ALL TO BE THINKING VERY RIGHT
NOW ABOUT WHAT THE NEXT STEPS
ARE AFTER THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN IS DONE.
AS MR LEONHARDT SAID, THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DOESN'T
CHANGE ANYTHING ON ITS OWN.
THEN WE HAVE TO GET INTO THE
BUSINESS OF REVISING THE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE AND IF
WE DO THIS THE WAY WE ASKED
WHICH IS TO SAY, YOU KNOW,
GRADUALLY WORK THROUGH
PIECEMEAL AMENDMENTS WE WILL
NEVER FINISH.
WE HAVE NOT YET FINISHED
IMPLEMENTING THE 2009 LANDY'S
SELAMAT AND SO WHAT I WOULD
SUGGEST IS THAT YOU LOOK AT FOR
EXAMPLE, CHARLOTTESVILLE,
VIRGINIA WHICH ACTUALLY WENT
THROUGH AN ENTIRE PLAN AND
ZONING COMPREHENSIVE ZONING
REWRITE IN A PERIOD OF FOUR
YEARS.
AND SO I THINK YOU AND I SHOULD
DO SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
WE'RE ALREADY BEHIND SCHEDULE
TO ACTUALLY MEET THAT DEADLINE
BUT WE SHOULD TRY TO DO THAT IN
ORDER TO DO THAT YOU NEED TO
PUT A BUDGET YOU NEED TO PUT
FUNDING IN THE BUDGET THIS YEAR
FOR ZONING REWRITE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, MAYOR.
I DON'T HAVE ANY OTHER CALLERS
ON LINE WITH THEIR HANDS RAISED
ZINO IN PUBLIC COMMENT IS CLOSE
TO MY MOTION TO ADJOURN PLEASE
MOVE BY COUNCILOR DENHA SAYING
MY COUNCILOR HARRISON
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR POSED.
WE'RE ADJOURNED